 refuse. As for those who went with him they were the
best young men we have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain--or some
god who was exactly like him. I cannot understand it, for I saw Mentor
here myself yesterday morning, and yet he was then setting out for
Pylos."

Noemon then went back to his father's house, but Antinous and Eurymachus
were very angry. They told the others to leave off playing, and to come
and sit down along with themselves. When they came, Antinous son of
Eupeithes spoke in anger. His heart was black with rage, and his eyes
flashed fire as he said:

"Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter; we
had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has
got away in spite of us, and with a picked crew too. He will be giving
us trouble presently; may Jove take him before he is full grown. Find me
a ship, therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie in wait for
him in the straits between Ithaca and Samos; he will then rue the day
that he set out to try and get news of his father."

Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all of
them went inside the buildings.

It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors were
plotting; for a man servant, Medon, overheard them from outside the
outer court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tell
his mistress. As he crossed the threshold of her room Penelope said:
"Medon, what have the suitors sent you here for? Is it to tell the maids
to leave their master's business and cook dinner for them? I wish they
may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere else,
but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make of my
son's estate. Did not your fathers tell you when you were children, how
good Ulysses had been to them--never doing anything high-handed, nor
speaking harshly to anybody? Kings may say things sometimes, and they
may take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses never did
an unjust thing by anybody--which shows what bad hearts you have, and
that there is no such thing as gratitude left in this world."

Then Medon said, "I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they are
plotting something much more dreadful now--may heaven frustrate their
design. They are going to try and murder Telemachus as he is coming home
from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of his father."

Then Penelope's heart sank within her, and for a long time she was
speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no utterance.
At last, however, she said, "Why did my son leave me? What business had
he to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over the ocean like
sea-horses? Does he want to die without leaving any one behind him to
keep up his name?"

"I do not know," answered Medon, "whether some god set him on to it, or
whether he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out if his
father was dead, or alive and on his way home."

Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief.
There were plenty of seats in the house, but she had no heart for
sitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floor of
her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both old
and young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last in a
transport of sorrow she exclaimed,

"My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction
than any other woman of my age and country. First I lost my brave and
lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose
name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos, and now my darling son
is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my having heard one word
about his leaving home. You hussies, there was not one of you would so
much as think of giving me a call out of my bed, though you all of you
very well knew when he was starting. If I had known he meant taking this
voyage, he would have had to give it up, no matter how much he was bent
upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him--one or other. Now, however,
go some of you and call old Dolius, who was given me by my father on my
marriage, and who is my gardener. Bid him go at once and tell everything
to Laertes, who may be able to hit on some plan for enlisting public
sympathy on our side, as against those who are trying to exterminate his
own race and that of Ulysses."

Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, "You may kill me, Madam, or let
me live on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell you the
real truth. I knew all about it, and gave him everything he wanted in
the way of bread and wine, but he made me take my solemn oath that I
would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days, unless you
asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for he did not want you to
spoil your beauty by crying. And now, Madam, wash your face, change
your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers to Minerva,
daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can save him even though he
be in the jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes: he has trouble enough
already. Besides, I cannot think that the gods hate the race of the son
of Arceisius so much, but there will be a son left to come up after him,
and inherit both the house and the fair fields that lie far all round
it."

With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the
tears from her eyes. Penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and
went upstairs with her maids. She then put some bruised barley into a
basket and began praying to Minerva.

"Hear me," she cried, "Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable. If
ever Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep or
heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling son
from the villainy of the suitors."

She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer;
meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister,
and one of them said:

"The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us. Little
does she dream that her son has now been doomed to die."

This was what they said, but they did not know what was going to happen.
Then Antinous said, "Comrades, let there be no loud talking, lest some
of it get carried inside. Let us be up and do that in silence, about
which we are all of a mind."

He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the
sea side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and sails
inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs
of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft, while
their fine servants brought them their armour. Then they made the ship
fast a little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers, and
waited till night should fall.

But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and
wondering whether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered by the
wicked suitors. Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen hemming
her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank into a
slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in
the likeness of Penelope's sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who had
married Eumelus and lived in Pherae. She told the vision to go to the
house of Ulysses, and to make Penelope leave off crying, so it came into
her room by the hole through which the thong went for pulling the door
to, and hovered over her head saying,

"You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer you
to weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no wrong, so he will yet
come back to you."

Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,
"Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very often, but I
suppose that is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then, to
leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me?
I, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good
quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas and
middle Argos; and now my darling son has gone off on board of a ship--a
foolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor to going
about among gatherings of men. I am even more anxious about him than
about my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think of him, lest
something should happen to him, either from the people among whom he has
gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting against him,
and are bent on killing him before he can return home."

Then the vision said, "Take heart, and be not so much dismayed. There is
one gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have stand by
his side, I mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and who
has sent me to bear you this message."

"Then," said Penelope, "if you are a god or have been sent here by
divine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one--is he
still alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?"

And the vision said, "I shall not tell you for certain whether he is
alive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation."

Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated
into thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and comforted,
so vivid had been her dream.

Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the
sea, intent on murdering Telemachus. Now there is a rocky islet called
Asteris, of no great size, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos, and
there is a harbour on either side of it where a ship can lie. Here then
the Achaeans placed themselves in ambush.


Book V

CALYPSO--ULYSSES REACHES SCHERIA ON A RAFT.

And now, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus--harbinger of light
alike to mortals and immortals--the gods met in council and with them,
Jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. Thereon Minerva began to
tell them of the many sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied him away
there in the house of the nymph Calypso.

"Father Jove," said she, "and all you other gods that live in
everlasting bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind and
well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. I hope
they will be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of
his subjects but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled them as though he were
their father. There he is, lying in great pain in an island where dwells
the nymph Calypso, who will not let him go; and he cannot get back to
his own country, for he can find neither ships nor sailors to take him
over the sea. Furthermore, wicked people are now trying to murder his
only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where
he has been to see if he can get news of his father."

"What, my dear, are you talking about?" replied her father, "did you not
send him there yourself, because you thought it would help Ulysses to
get home and punish the suitors? Besides, you are perfectly able to
protect Telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitors
have to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him."

When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, "Mercury, you are
our messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that poor
Ulysses is to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods nor men,
but after a perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he is to reach
fertile Scheria, {50} the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of kin to
the gods, and will honour him as though he were one of ourselves. They
will send him in a ship to his own country, and will give him more
bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought back from Troy,
if he had had all his prize money and had got home without disaster.
This is how we have settled that he shall return to his country and his
friends."

Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as
he was told. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with
which he could fly like the wind over land and sea. He took the wand
with which he seals men's eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he
pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over Pieria; then he swooped
down through the firmament till he reached the level of the sea, whose
waves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing every hole and
corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray. He
flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to the
island which was his journey's end, he left the sea and went on by land
till he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.

He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth, and
one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal
wood. As for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden
shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully. Round her cave there
was a thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees,
wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests--owls, hawks, and
chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the waters. A vine
loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about the mouth of
the cave; there were also four running rills of water in channels cut
pretty close together, and turned hither and thither so as to irrigate
the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed. {51}
Even a god could not help being charmed with such a lovely spot,
so Mercury stood still and looked at it; but when he had admired it
sufficiently he went inside the cave.

Calypso knew him at once--for the gods all know each other, no matter
how far they live from one another--but Ulysses was not within; he was
on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears
in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso
gave Mercury a seat and said: "Why have you come to see me,
Mercury--honoured, and ever welcome--for you do not visit me often? Say
what you want; I will do it for you at once if I can, and if it can be
done at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before you."

As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed
him some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had enough,
and then said:

"We are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask me why I
have come here, and I will tell you truly as you would have me do. Jove
sent me; it was no doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all
this way over the sea where there are no cities full of people to offer
me sacrifices or choice hecatombs? Nevertheless I had to come, for none
of us other gods can cross Jove, nor transgress his orders. He says that
you have here the most ill-starred of all those who fought nine years
before the city of King Priam and sailed home in the tenth year after
having sacked it. On their way home they sinned against Minerva, {52}
who raised both wind and waves against them, so that all his brave
companions perished, and he alone was carried hither by wind and tide.
Jove says that you are to let this man go at once, for it is decreed
that he shall not perish here, far from his own people, but shall return
to his house and country and see his friends again."

Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, "You gods," she
exclaimed, "ought to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealous
and hate seeing a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with
him in open matrimony. So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion,
you precious gods were all of you furious till Diana went and killed him
in Ortygia. So again when Ceres fell in love with Iasion, and yielded to
him in a thrice-ploughed fallow field, Jove came to hear of it before so
very long and killed Iasion with his thunderbolts. And now you are angry
with me too because I have a man here. I found the poor creature sitting
all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck his ship with lightning
and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were drowned, while he
himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island. I got fond of him
and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him immortal, so that
he should never grow old all his days; still I cannot cross Jove, nor
bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insists upon it, let the
man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send him anywhere myself
for I have neither ships nor men who can take him. Nevertheless I will
readily give him such advice, in all good faith, as will be likely to
bring him safely to his own country."

"Then send him away," said Mercury, "or Jove will be angry with you and
punish you".

On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses, for
she had heard Jove's message. She found him sitting upon the beach with
his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness; for
he had got tired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep with her
in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have it so. As for
the day time, he spent it on the rocks and on the sea shore, weeping,
crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon the sea.
Calypso then went close up to him said:

"My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your life
out any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will; so go,
cut some beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with an upper
deck that it may carry you safely over the sea. I will put bread, wine,
and water on board to save you from starving. I will also give you
clothes, and will send you a fair wind to take you home, if the gods in
heaven so will it--for they know more about these things, and can settle
them better than I can."

Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. "Now goddess," he answered, "there is
something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help me home
when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on a raft. Not
even a well found ship with a fair wind could venture on such a distant
voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall make me go on board a raft
unless you first solemnly swear that you mean me no mischief."

Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: "You know a great
deal," said she, "but you are quite wrong here. May heaven above and
earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx--and this
is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take--that I mean you
no sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what I should do
myself in your place. I am dealing with you quite straightforwardly; my
heart is not made of iron, and I am very sorry for you."

When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and Ulysses
followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on and on till
they came to Calypso's cave, where Ulysses took the seat that Mercury
had just left. Calypso set meat and drink before him of the food that
mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar for herself, and
they laid their hands on the good things that were before them. When
they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink, Calypso spoke,
saying:

"Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own
land at once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how much
suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own country,
you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and let me
make you immortal, no matter how anxious you may be to see this wife
of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after day; yet I
flatter myself that I am no whit less tall or well-looking than she
is, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman should compare in
beauty with an immortal."

"Goddess," replied Ulysses, "do not be angry with me about this. I
am quite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or so
beautiful as yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are an immortal.
Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothing else. If some
god wrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it and make the best
of it. I have had infinite trouble both by land and sea already, so let
this go with the rest."

Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into
the inner part of the cave and went to bed.

When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Ulysses put on
his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light gossamer
fabric, very fine and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle about her
waist and a veil to cover her head. She at once set herself to think how
she could speed Ulysses on his way. So she gave him a great bronze
axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides, and had a
beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it. She also gave him a
sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of the island where the
largest trees grew--alder, poplar and pine, that reached the sky--very
dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in the water. {53}
Then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew, Calypso went
home, leaving him to cut them, which he soon finished doing. He cut down
twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring them by rule in good
workmanlike fashion. Meanwhile Calypso came back with some augers, so
he bored holes with them and fitted the timbers together with bolts and
rivets. He made the raft as broad as a skilled shipwright makes the beam
of a large vessel, and he fixed a deck on top of the ribs, and ran a
gunwale all round it. He also made a mast with a yard arm, and a rudder
to steer with. He fenced the raft all round with wicker hurdles as a
protection against the waves, and then he threw on a quantity of wood.
By and by Calypso brought him some linen to make the sails, and he made
these too, excellently, making them fast with braces and sheets. Last of
all, with the help of levers, he drew the raft down into the water.

In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso
sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean
clothes. She gave him a goat skin full of black wine, and another larger
one of water; she also gave him a wallet full of provisions, and found
him in much good meat. Moreover, she made the wind fair and warm for
him, and gladly did Ulysses spread his sail before it, while he sat and
guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder. He never closed his
eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on late-setting Bootes, and on
the Bear--which men also call the wain, and which turns round and round
where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping into the stream of
Oceanus--for Calypso had told him to keep this to his left. Days seven
and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth the dim outlines
of the mountains on the nearest part of the Phaeacian coast appeared,
rising like a shield on the horizon.

But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight of
Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He could see
him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged his
head and muttered to himself, saying, "Good heavens, so the gods have
been changing their minds about Ulysses while I was away in Ethiopia,
and now he is close to the land of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed
that he shall escape from the calamities that have befallen him. Still,
he shall have plenty of hardship yet before he has done with it."

Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred
it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till
earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of
the heavens. Winds from East, South, North, and West fell upon him all
at the same time, and a tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses' heart
began to fail him. "Alas," he said to himself in his dismay, "what ever
will become of me? I am afraid Calypso was right when she said I should
have trouble by sea before I got back home. It is all coming true. How
black is Jove making heaven with his clouds, and what a sea the winds
are raising from every quarter at once. I am now safe to perish. Blest
and thrice blest were those Danaans who fell before Troy in the cause
of the sons of Atreus. Would that I had been killed on the day when the
Trojans were pressing me so sorely about the dead body of Achilles, for
then I should have had due burial and the Achaeans would have honoured
my name; but now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end."

As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft
reeled again, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He let go the
helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that it broke the mast
half way up, and both sail and yard went over into the sea. For a long
time Ulysses was under water, and it was all he could do to rise to the
surface again, for the clothes Calypso had given him weighed him down;
but at last he got his head above water and spat out the bitter brine
that was running down his face in streams. In spite of all this,
however, he did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast as he could
towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as to escape
drowning. The sea took the raft and tossed it about as Autumn winds
whirl thistledown round and round upon a road. It was as though the
South, North, East, and West winds were all playing battledore and
shuttlecock with it at once.

When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called
Leucothea, saw him. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been
since raised to the rank of a marine goddess. Seeing in what great
distress Ulysses now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like
a sea-gull from the waves, took her seat upon the raft.

"My poor good man," said she, "why is Neptune so furiously angry with
you? He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster
he will not kill you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as I bid
you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim to the
Phaeacian coast where better luck awaits you. And here, take my veil and
put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to no harm
so long as you wear it. As soon as you touch land take it off, throw it
back as far as you can into the sea, and then go away again." With these
words she took off her veil and gave it him. Then she dived down again
like a sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters.

But Ulysses did not know what to think. "Alas," he said to himself in
his dismay, "this is only some one or other of the gods who is luring me
to ruin by advising me to quit my raft. At any rate I will not do so at
present, for the land where she said I should be quit of all troubles
seemed to be still a good way off. I know what I will do--I am sure it
will be best--no matter what happens I will stick to the raft as long
as her timbers hold together, but when the sea breaks her up I will swim
for it; I do not see how I can do any better than this."

While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave that
seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft,
which then went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry chaff tossed
about by a whirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon
it as if he were on horseback; he then took off the clothes Calypso
had given him, bound Ino's veil under his arms, and plunged into the
sea--meaning to swim on shore. King Neptune watched him as he did so,
and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying, "There now, swim
up and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do people.
I do not think you will be able to say that I have let you off too
lightly." On this he lashed his horses and drove to Aegae where his
palace is.

But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the
winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused a good
stiff breeze from the North that should lay the waters till Ulysses
reached the land of the Phaeacians where he would be safe.

Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with
a heavy swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but when the
third day broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm without so much
as a breath of air stirring. As he rose on the swell he looked eagerly
ahead, and could see land quite near. Then, as children rejoice when
their dear father begins to get better after having for a long time
borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but the gods
deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when he again saw land
and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might once more set
foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot, he began to
hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell still broke
against them with a terrific roar. Everything was enveloped in spray;
there were no harbours where a ship might ride, nor shelter of any kind,
but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.

Ulysses' heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly to
himself, "Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that I
had given up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the coast is
rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the sea,
with deep water close under them so that I cannot climb out for want of
foot hold. I am afraid some great wave will lift me off my legs and dash
me against the rocks as I leave the water--which would give me a
sorry landing. If, on the other hand, I swim further in search of some
shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry me out to sea again
sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster of the
deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many such, and I know that
Neptune is very angry with me."

While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with such
force against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn to
pieces if Minerva had not shown him what to do. He caught hold of the
rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till the wave
retired, so he was saved that time; but presently the wave came on again
and carried him back with it far into the sea--tearing his hands as the
suckers of a polypus are torn when some one plucks it from its bed, and
the stones come up along with it--even so did the rocks tear the skin
from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep down under the
water.

Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his own
destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him. He
swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating against
the land, and at the same time he kept looking towards the shore to
see if he could find some haven, or a spit that should take the waves
aslant. By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of a river, and
here he thought would be the best place, for there were no rocks, and it
afforded shelter from the wind. He felt that there was a current, so he
prayed inwardly and said:

"Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of the
sea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has lost
his way has at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my
distress I draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees of your
riverhood. Have mercy upon me, O king, for I declare myself your
suppliant."

Then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm
before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Here
at last Ulysses' knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had
completely broken him. His body was all swollen, and his mouth and
nostrils ran down like a river with sea-water, so that he could neither
breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently,
when he had got his breath and came to himself again, he took off the
scarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the salt {54} stream
of the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave that
bore it towards her. Then he left the river, laid himself down among the
rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth.

"Alas," he cried to himself in his dismay, "what ever will become of me,
and how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bed through the
long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the bitter cold and
damp may make an end of me--for towards sunrise there will be a keen
wind blowing from off the river. If, on the other hand, I climb the hill
side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, I may escape
the cold and have a good night's rest, but some savage beast may take
advantage of me and devour me."

In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found one
upon some high ground not far from the water. There he crept beneath
two shoots of olive that grew from a single stock--the one an ungrafted
sucker, while the other had been grafted. No wind, however squally,
could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun's rays
pierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they grow
into one another. Ulysses crept under these and began to make himself
a bed to lie on, for there was a great litter of dead leaves lying
about--enough to make a covering for two or three men even in hard
winter weather. He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himself down
and heaped the leaves all round him. Then, as one who lives alone in the
country, far from any neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed in the
ashes to save himself from having to get a light elsewhere, even so did
Ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and Minerva shed a sweet sleep
upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose all memories of his
sorrows.


Book VI

THE MEETING BETWEEN NAUSICAA AND ULYSSES.

So here Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went off
to the country and city of the Phaeacians--a people who used to live in
the fair town of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes
were stronger than they and plundered them, so their king Nausithous
moved them thence and settled them in Scheria, far from all other
people. He surrounded the city with a wall, built houses and temples,
and divided the lands among his people; but he was dead and gone to
the house of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counsels were inspired
of heaven, was now reigning. To his house, then, did Minerva hie in
furtherance of the return of Ulysses.

She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there
slept a girl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to King
Alcinous. Two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty,
one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well made
folding doors. Minerva took the form of the famous sea captain Dymas's
daughter, who was a bosom friend of Nausicaa and just her own age; then,
coming up to the girl's bedside like a breath of wind, she hovered over
her head and said:

"Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazy
daughter? Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are going
to be married almost immediately, and should not only be well dressed
yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attend you. This is
the way to get yourself a good name, and to make your father and mother
proud of you. Suppose, then, that we make tomorrow a washing day,
and start at daybreak. I will come and help you so that you may have
everything ready as soon as possible, for all the best young men among
your own people are courting you, and you are not going to remain a
maid much longer. Ask your father, therefore, to have a waggon and mules
ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, and girdles, and you
can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you than walking, for
the washing-cisterns are some way from the town."

When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say
is the everlasting home of the gods. Here no wind beats roughly, and
neither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine
and in a great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are
illumined for ever and ever. This was the place to which the goddess
went when she had given instructions to the girl.

By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about
her dream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her
father and mother all about it, and found them in their own room. Her
mother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with her
maids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as he was
going out to attend a meeting of the town council, which the Phaeacian
aldermen had convened. She stopped him and said:

"Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon? I want to
take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You are the chief
man here, so it is only right that you should have a clean shirt when
you attend meetings of the council. Moreover, you have five sons at
home, two of them married, while the other three are good looking
bachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen when they go to
a dance, and I have been thinking about all this."

She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like to,
but her father knew and said, "You shall have the mules, my love, and
whatever else you have a mind for. Be off with you, and the men shall
get you a good strong waggon with a body to it that will hold all your
clothes."

On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out,
harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the clothes
down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon. Her mother
prepared her a basket of provisions with all sorts of good things, and a
goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon, and her mother
gave her also a golden cruse of oil, that she and her women might anoint
themselves. Then she took the whip and reins and lashed the mules on,
whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered on the road. They pulled
without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaa and her wash of clothes,
but the maids also who were with her.

When they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns,
through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any
quantity of linen, no matter how dirty. Here they unharnessed the mules
and turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the
water side. They took the clothes out of the waggon, put them in the
water, and vied with one another in treading them in the pits to get the
dirt out. After they had washed them and got them quite clean, they laid
them out by the sea side, where the waves had raised a high beach of
shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing themselves with
olive oil. Then they got their dinner by the side of the stream, and
waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. When they had done
dinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to
play at ball, while Nausicaa sang for them. As the huntress Diana goes
forth upon the mountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boars or
deer, and the wood nymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Jove, take their
sport along with her (then is Leto proud at seeing her daughter stand a
full head taller than the others, and eclipse the loveliest amid a whole
bevy of beauties), even so did the girl outshine her handmaids.

When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the
clothes and putting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider how
Ulysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him
to the city of the Phaeacians. The girl, therefore, threw a ball at one
of the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water. On this they
all shouted, and the noise they made woke Ulysses, who sat up in his bed
of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be.

"Alas," said he to himself, "what kind of people have I come amongst?
Are they cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane? I
seem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those of
the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows of
green grass. At any rate I am among a race of men and women. Let me try
if I cannot manage to get a look at them."

As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a bough
covered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness. He looked like some
lion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and
defying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest of
oxen, sheep, or deer, for he is famished, and will dare break even
into a well fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep--even such did
Ulysses seem to the young women, as he drew near to them all naked as he
was, for he was in great want. On seeing one so unkempt and so begrimed
with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits that jutted
out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm, for Minerva
put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. She stood
right in front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he should go up to
her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as a suppliant, or
stay where he was and entreat her to give him some clothes and show him
the way to the town. In the end he deemed it best to entreat her from a
distance in case the girl should take offence at his coming near enough
to clasp her knees, so he addressed her in honeyed and persuasive
language.

"O queen," he said, "I implore your aid--but tell me, are you a goddess
or are you a mortal woman? If you are a goddess and dwell in heaven, I
can only conjecture that you are Jove's daughter Diana, for your face
and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are a mortal
and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and mother--thrice
happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and delighted
they must feel when they see so fair a scion as yourself going out to a
dance; most happy, however, of all will he be whose wedding gifts have
been the richest, and who takes you to his own home. I never yet saw any
one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am lost in admiration as I
behold you. I can only compare you to a young palm tree which I saw when
I was at Delos growing near the altar of Apollo--for I was there, too,
with much people after me, when I was on that journey which has been the
source of all my troubles. Never yet did such a young plant shoot out
of the ground as that was, and I admired and wondered at it exactly as I
now admire and wonder at yourself. I dare not clasp your knees, but I
am in great distress; yesterday made the twentieth day that I had been
tossing about upon the sea. The winds and waves have taken me all the
way from the Ogygian island, {55} and now fate has flung me upon this
coast that I may endure still further suffering; for I do not think that
I have yet come to the end of it, but rather that heaven has still much
evil in store for me.

"And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person I
have met, and I know no one else in this country. Show me the way to
your town, and let me have anything that you may have brought hither to
wrap your clothes in. May heaven grant you in all things your heart's
desire--husband, house, and a happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing
better in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind in a
house. It discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their friends
glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one."

To this Nausicaa answered, "Stranger, you appear to be a sensible,
well-disposed person. There is no accounting for luck; Jove gives
prosperity to rich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take what
he has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it. Now, however, that
you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothes nor
for anything else that a foreigner in distress may reasonably look for.
I will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the name of our
people; we are called Phaeacians, and I am daughter to Alcinous, in whom
the whole power of the state is vested."

Then she called her maids and said, "Stay where you are, you girls. Can
you not see a man without running away from him? Do you take him for a
robber or a murderer? Neither he nor any one else can come here to do
us Phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on a
land's end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do with
any other people. This is only some poor man who has lost his way, and
we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners in distress
are under Jove's protection, and will take what they can get and be
thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to eat and drink,
and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from the
wind."

On this the maids left off running away and began calling one another
back. They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had told
them, and brought him a shirt and cloak. They also brought him the
little golden cruse of oil, and told him to go and wash in the stream.
But Ulysses said, "Young women, please to stand a little on one side
that I may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil,
for it is long enough since my skin has had a drop of oil upon it. I
cannot wash as long as you all keep standing there. I am ashamed to
strip {56} before a number of good looking young women."

Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysses
washed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and
from his broad shoulders. When he had thoroughly washed himself, and had
got the brine out of his hair, he anointed himself with oil, and put
on the clothes which the girl had given him; Minerva then made him look
taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair grow thick on
the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she
glorified him about the head and shoulders as a skilful workman who has
studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minerva enriches a piece of
silver plate by gilding it--and his work is full of beauty. Then he went
and sat down a little way off upon the beach, looking quite young and
handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she said to
her maids:

"Hush, my dears, for I want to say something. I believe the gods who
live in heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. When I first saw
him I thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of the gods
who dwell in heaven. I should like my future husband to be just such
another as he is, if he would only stay here and not want to go away.
However, give him something to eat and drink."

They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate and
drank ravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind.
Meanwhile, Nausicaa bethought her of another matter. She got the linen
folded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she
took her seat, she called Ulysses:

"Stranger," said she, "rise and let us be going back to the town; I will
introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I can tell you
that you will meet all the best people among the Phaeacians. But be sure
and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person. As long as
we are going past the fields and farm lands, follow briskly behind the
waggon along with the maids and I will lead the way myself. Presently,
however, we shall come to the town, where you will find a high wall
running all round it, and a good harbour on either side with a narrow
entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn up by the road side,
for every one has a place where his own ship can lie. You will see the
market place with a temple of Neptune in the middle of it, and paved
with large stones bedded in the earth. Here people deal in ship's gear
of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, are the places
where oars are made, for the Phaeacians are not a nation of archers;
they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are a sea-faring folk, and
pride themselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with which they travel
far over the sea.

"I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against
me later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low
fellow, if he met us, might say, 'Who is this fine-looking stranger that
is going about with Nausicaa? Where did she find him? I suppose she is
going to marry him. Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she has taken
from some foreign vessel, for we have no neighbours; or some god has at
last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she is going to
live with him all the rest of her life. It would be a good thing if she
would take herself off and find a husband somewhere else, for she will
not look at one of the many excellent young Phaeacians who are in love
with her.' This is the kind of disparaging remark that would be made
about me, and I could not complain, for I should myself be scandalised
at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about with men in spite
of everybody, while her father and mother were still alive, and without
having been married in the face of all the world.

"If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help you
home, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars by the
road side dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow all
round it. Here my father has a field of rich garden ground, about as far
from the town as a man's voice will carry. Sit down there and wait for
a while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach my father's
house. Then, when you think we must have done this, come into the town
and ask the way to the house of my father Alcinous. You will have no
difficulty in finding it; any child will point it out to you, for no one
else in the whole town has anything like such a fine house as he has.
When you have got past the gates and through the outer court, go right
across the inner court till you come to my mother. You will find her
sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by firelight. It is a
fine sight to see her as she leans back against one of the bearing-posts
with her maids all ranged behind her. Close to her seat stands that of
my father, on which he sits and topes like an immortal god. Never mind
him, but go up to my mother, and lay your hands upon her knees if you
would get home quickly. If you can gain her over, you may hope to see
your own country again, no matter how distant it may be."

So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.
The mules drew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.
She was careful not to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were
following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with
judgement. As the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove of
Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter of
Jove.

"Hear me," he cried, "daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, hear
me now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wrecking me.
Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friends and
be hospitably received by the Phaeacians."

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show
herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune, who was
still furious in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting home.


Book VII

RECEPTION OF ULYSSES AT THE PALACE OF KING ALCINOUS.

Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the
town. When she reached her father's house she drew up at the gateway,
and her brothers--comely as the gods--gathered round her, took the mules
out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she
went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, lit
the fire for her. This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira,
and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was king over the
Phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as though he were a god. {57}
She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and
brought her supper for her into her own room.

Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed a
thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaeacians
who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was. Then, as he
was just entering the town, she came towards him in the likeness of a
little girl carrying a pitcher. She stood right in front of him, and
Ulysses said:

"My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous?
I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your
town and country."

Then Minerva said, "Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house you
want, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will go before
you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look
at any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide
strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place. They are
a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of Neptune in ships
that glide along like thought, or as a bird in the air."

On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not one
of the Phaeacians could see him as he passed through the city in the
midst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towards
him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness. He admired their
harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city,
which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when
they reached the king's house Minerva said:

"This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you.
You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not be
afraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he is to
carry his point, even though he is a stranger. First find the queen. Her
name is Arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband Alcinous.
They both descend originally from Neptune, who was father to Nausithous
by Periboea, a woman of great beauty. Periboea was the youngest daughter
of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the giants, but he ruined his
ill-fated people and lost his own life to boot.

"Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, the
great Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaeacians. Nausithous had two
sons Rhexenor and Alcinous; {58} Apollo killed the first of them while
he was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter
Arete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honoured
of all those that keep house along with their husbands.

"Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her
children, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon
her as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for
she is a thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any
women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settle
their disputes. If you can gain her good will, you may have every hope
of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home and
country."

Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went to
Marathon {59} and to the spacious streets of Athens, where she entered
the abode of Erechtheus; but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous,
and he pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the threshold
of bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun or
moon. The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the
cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hung on pillars of
silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver and
the hook of the door was of gold.

On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, with
his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the
palace of king Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow old.
Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one end to the
other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the house
had made. Here the chief persons of the Phaeacians used to sit and eat
and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there were golden
figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands, raised on
pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table. There are
{60} fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are always grinding
rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom, or sit and
spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like the fluttering
of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it will turn
oil. As the Phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so their women
excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them all manner of
useful arts, and they are very intelligent.

Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of
about four acres with a wall all round it. It is full of beautiful
trees--pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There are
luscious figs also, and olives in full growth. The fruits never rot nor
fail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so
soft that a new crop ripens before the old has dropped. Pear grows on
pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for
there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this,
the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being
gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on
have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again
are just changing colour. In the furthest part of the ground there are
beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year
round. Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout the
whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the outer
court to the house itself, and the town's people draw water from it.
Such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed the
house of king Alcinous.

So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he
had looke