d long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the
precincts of the house. There he found all the chief people among the
Phaeacians making their drink offerings to Mercury, which they always
did the last thing before going away for the night. {61} He went
straight through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness
in which Minerva had enveloped him, till he reached Arete and King
Alcinous; then he laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at
that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and he became
visible. Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there,
but Ulysses began at once with his petition.

"Queen Arete," he exclaimed, "daughter of great Rhexenor, in my distress
I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests (whom may
heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they leave their
possessions to their children, and all the honours conferred upon them
by the state) to help me home to my own country as soon as possible; for
I have been long in trouble and away from my friends."

Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their
peace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent
speaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty
addressed them thus:

"Alcinous," said he, "it is not creditable to you that a stranger should
be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is waiting to
hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and take a seat
on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix some wine and
water that we may make a drink offering to Jove the lord of thunder,
who takes all well disposed suppliants under his protection; and let
the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever there may be in the
house."

When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from
the hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been sitting
beside him, and was his favourite son. A maid servant then brought him
water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for
him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean table beside him; an upper
servant brought him bread and offered him many good things of what there
was in the house, and Ulysses ate and drank. Then Alcinous said to one
of the servants, "Pontonous, mix a cup of wine and hand it round that
we may make drink-offerings to Jove the lord of thunder, who is the
protector of all well-disposed suppliants."

Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink-offering. When they had made their offerings, and
had drunk each as much as he was minded, Alcinous said:

"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. You
have had your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shall
invite a still larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial
banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of his
escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to his
own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, no matter how
distant it may be. We must see that he comes to no harm while on his
homeward journey, but when he is once at home he will have to take
the luck he was born with for better or worse like other people. It is
possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who
has come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods
are departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made
themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them
hecatombs. They come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves,
and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other
of them, they affect no concealment, for we are as near of kin to the
gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are." {62}

Then Ulysses said: "Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into
your head. I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body
nor mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.
Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me,
you would say that I was still worse off than they are. Nevertheless,
let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a very
importunate thing, and thrusts itself on a man's notice no matter how
dire is his distress. I am in great trouble, yet it insists that I shall
eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows and dwell only
on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, do as you propose,
and at break of day set about helping me to get home. I shall be content
to die if I may first once more behold my property, my bondsmen, and all
the greatness of my house." {63}

Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that he
should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then when
they had made their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he
was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving
Ulysses in the cloister with Arete and Alcinous while the servants were
taking the things away after supper. Arete was the first to speak,
for she recognised the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that Ulysses
was wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said,
"Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should like
to ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes? Did
you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?"

And Ulysses answered, "It would be a long story Madam, were I to relate
in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been laid
heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island far away
in the sea which is called 'the Ogygian.' Here dwells the cunning and
powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives by herself far
from all neighbours human or divine. Fortune, however, brought me to
her hearth all desolate and alone, for Jove struck my ship with his
thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean. My brave comrades were
drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and was carried
hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last during the
darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to the Ogygian island
where the great goddess Calypso lives. She took me in and treated me
with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me immortal that I
might never grow old, but she could not persuade me to let her do so.

"I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the good
clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but at last
when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own free will,
either because Jove had told her she must, or because she had changed
her mind. She sent me from her island on a raft, which she provisioned
with abundance of bread and wine. Moreover she gave me good stout
clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both warm and fair. Days seven
and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth I caught sight of
the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast--and glad indeed was
I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there was still much trouble in
store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me go no further, and
raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly high that I
could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under the fury of
the gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and current brought me to
your shores.

"There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and the
waves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swam
on till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing place, for
there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then, I
got out of the water and gathered my senses together again. Night was
coming on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket, where I covered
myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent me off into a
very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as I was I slept among the leaves all
night, and through the next day till afternoon, when I woke as the sun
was westering, and saw your daughter's maid servants playing upon the
beach, and your daughter among them looking like a goddess. I besought
her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition, much more so
than could be expected from so young a person--for young people are apt
to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty of bread and wine, and when she
had had me washed in the river she also gave me the clothes in which you
see me. Now, therefore, though it has pained me to do so, I have told
you the whole truth."

Then Alcinous said, "Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to
bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she
was the first person whose aid you asked."

"Pray do not scold her," replied Ulysses; "she is not to blame. She did
tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and afraid,
for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. Every human
being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable."

"Stranger," replied Alcinous, "I am not the kind of man to get angry
about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by Father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are, and how
much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry my daughter,
and become my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give you a house and
an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here against your
own wish, and that you may be sure of this I will attend tomorrow to the
matter of your escort. You can sleep {64} during the whole voyage if you
like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters either to your own
home, or wherever you please, even though it be a long way further
off than Euboea, which those of my people who saw it when they took
yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, tell me is the
furthest of any place--and yet they did the whole voyage in a single day
without distressing themselves, and came back again afterwards. You
will thus see how much my ships excel all others, and what magnificent
oarsmen my sailors are."

Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, "Father Jove, grant that
Alcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable
name among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country."

Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in the
room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to
spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses to
wear. The maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and when
they had made the bed they came up to Ulysses and said, "Rise, sir
stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready," and glad indeed was
he to go to his rest.

So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway; but
Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his wife by
his side.


Book VIII

BANQUET IN THE HOUSE OF ALCINOUS--THE GAMES.

Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinous
and Ulysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaeacian place
of assembly, which was near the ships. When they got there they sat down
side by side on a seat of polished stone, while Minerva took the form
of one of Alcinous' servants, and went round the town in order to help
Ulysses to get home. She went up to the citizens, man by man, and said,
"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, come to the assembly
all of you and listen to the stranger who has just come off a long
voyage to the house of King Alcinous; he looks like an immortal god."

With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to the
assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. Every one was
struck with the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautified him
about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter than he
really was, that he might impress the Phaeacians favourably as being a
very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many trials of skill
to which they would challenge him. Then, when they were got together,
Alcinous spoke:

"Hear me," said he, "aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians,
that I may speak even as I am minded. This stranger, whoever he may be,
has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either East or
West. He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled. Let
us then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before him;
indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complain
of me for not speeding on his way soon enough. Let us draw a ship into
the sea--one that has never yet made a voyage--and man her with two and
fifty of our smartest young sailors. Then when you have made fast
your oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to
prepare a feast. {65} I will find you in everything. I am giving these
instructions to the young men who will form the crew, for as regards
you aldermen and town councillors, you will join me in entertaining
our guest in the cloisters. I can take no excuses, and we will have
Demodocus to sing to us; for there is no bard like him whatever he may
choose to sing about."

Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a
servant went to fetch Demodocus. The fifty-two picked oarsmen went to
the sea shore as they had been told, and when they got there they drew
the ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound
the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due
course, and spread the white sails aloft. They moored the vessel a
little way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the house
of King Alcinous. The out houses, {66} yards, and all the precincts were
filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and
Alcinous killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two oxen.
These they skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent banquet.

A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse had
dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though
she had endowed him with a divine gift of song, she had robbed him of
his eyesight. Pontonous set a seat for him among the guests, leaning it
up against a bearing-post. He hung the lyre for him on a peg over his
head, and showed him where he was to feel for it with his hands. He also
set a fair table with a basket of victuals by his side, and a cup of
wine from which he might drink whenever he was so disposed.

The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before
them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse
inspired Demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially
a matter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel
between Ulysses and Achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on
one another as they sat together at a banquet. But Agamemnon was glad
when he heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for Apollo
had foretold him this at Pytho when he crossed the stone floor to
consult the oracle. Here was the beginning of the evil that by the will
of Jove fell both upon Danaans and Trojans.

Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head and
covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see that he
was weeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears from his
eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a drink-offering to
the gods; but when the Phaeacians pressed Demodocus to sing further, for
they delighted in his lays, then Ulysses again drew his mantle over his
head and wept bitterly. No one noticed his distress except Alcinous, who
was sitting near him, and heard the heavy sighs that he was heaving. So
he at once said, "Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, we
have had enough now, both of the feast, and of the minstrelsy that is
its due accompaniment; let us proceed therefore to the athletic sports,
so that our guest on his return home may be able to tell his friends
how much we surpass all other nations as boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and
runners."

With these words he led the way, and the others followed after. A
servant hung Demodocus's lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the
cloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chief
men of the Phaeacians were going to see the sports; a crowd of several
thousands of people followed them, and there were many excellent
competitors for all the prizes. Acroneos, Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus,
Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, Anabesineus, and
Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton. There was also Euryalus son of
Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best looking man
among the Phaeacians except Laodamas. Three sons of Alcinous, Laodamas,
Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also.

The foot races came first. The course was set out for them from the
starting post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flew
forward at the same moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long way; he
left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that a couple
of mules can plough in a fallow field. {67} They then turned to the
painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved to be the best man.
Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing the disc
there was no one who could approach Elatreus. Alcinous's son Laodamas
was the best boxer, and he it was who presently said, when they had all
been diverted with the games, "Let us ask the stranger whether he excels
in any of these sports; he seems very powerfully built; his thighs,
calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength, nor is he at all
old, but he has suffered much lately, and there is nothing like the sea
for making havoc with a man, no matter how strong he is."

"You are quite right, Laodamas," replied Euryalus, "go up to your guest
and speak to him about it yourself."

When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowd
and said to Ulysses, "I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself for some
one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any of them--and
you must have gone in for many a one before now. There is nothing that
does any one so much credit all his life long as the showing himself a
proper man with his hands and feet. Have a try therefore at something,
and banish all sorrow from your mind. Your return home will not be long
delayed, for the ship is already drawn into the water, and the crew is
found."

Ulysses answered, "Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? my mind is
set rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinite trouble,
and am come among you now as a suppliant, praying your king and people
to further me on my return home."

Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, "I gather, then, that you
are unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in. I
suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships
as captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward
freights and homeward cargoes. There does not seem to be much of the
athlete about you."

"For shame, Sir," answered Ulysses, fiercely, "you are an insolent
fellow--so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in
speech, person, and understanding. One man may be of weak presence, but
heaven has adorned this with such a good conversation that he charms
every one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers with
him so that he is leader in all assemblies of his fellows, and wherever
he goes he is looked up to. Another may be as handsome as a god, but his
good looks are not crowned with discretion. This is your case. No god
could make a finer looking fellow than you are, but you are a fool. Your
ill-judged remarks have made me exceedingly angry, and you are quite
mistaken, for I excel in a great many athletic exercises; indeed, so
long as I had youth and strength, I was among the first athletes of the
age. Now, however, I am worn out by labour and sorrow, for I have gone
through much both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary
sea; still, in spite of all this I will compete, for your taunts have
stung me to the quick."

So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc,
larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacians
when disc-throwing among themselves. {68} Then, swinging it back, he
threw it from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as
he did so. The Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as
it sped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been
made yet. Minerva, in the form of a man, came and marked the place where
it had fallen. "A blind man, Sir," said she, "could easily tell your
mark by groping for it--it is so far ahead of any other. You may make
your mind easy about this contest, for no Phaeacian can come near to
such a throw as yours."

Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on,
so he began to speak more pleasantly. "Young men," said he, "come up to
that throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy or even
heavier. If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for I
am exceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care what it
is, with any man of you all except Laodamas, but not with him because I
am his guest, and one cannot compete with one's own personal friend.
At least I do not think it a prudent or a sensible thing for a guest
to challenge his host's family at any game, especially when he is in a
foreign country. He will cut the ground from under his own feet if he
does; but I make no exception as regards any one else, for I want to
have the matter out and know which is the best man. I am a good hand
at every kind of athletic sport known among mankind. I am an excellent
archer. In battle I am always the first to bring a man down with my
arrow, no matter how many more are taking aim at him alongside of me.
Philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than I could when we
Achaeans were before Troy and in practice. I far excel every one else
in the whole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face of the
earth, but I should not like to shoot against the mighty dead, such as
Hercules, or Eurytus the Oechalian--men who could shoot against the gods
themselves. This in fact was how Eurytus came prematurely by his end,
for Apollo was angry with him and killed him because he challenged him
as an archer. I can throw a dart farther than any one else can shoot an
arrow. Running is the only point in respect of which I am afraid some of
the Phaeacians might beat me, for I have been brought down very low at
sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore I am still weak."

They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, "Sir, we have
had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which I
understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been
displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by one
of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one who
knows how to talk with propriety. I hope you will apprehend my meaning,
and will explain to any one of your chief men who may be dining with
yourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditary
aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are not particularly
remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularly
fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We are extremely fond of good
dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen,
warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best
dancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be able
to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as sailors,
runners, dancers, and minstrels. Demodocus has left his lyre at my
house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him."

On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king's house,
and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It was
their business to manage everything connected with the sports, so
they made the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers.
Presently the servant came back with Demodocus's lyre, and he took his
place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the town
began to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was delighted with the
merry twinkling of their feet.

Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and how
they first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made Venus
many presents, and defiled King Vulcan's marriage bed, so the sun, who
saw what they were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry when he
heard such dreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief,
got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chains which
none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there in
that place. {69} When he had finished his snare he went into his bedroom
and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs; he also
let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Not even a god
could see them so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he had spread
the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were setting out for
the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world was the one
he was most fond of. But Mars kept no blind look out, and as soon as he
saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love for Venus.

Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was
about sitting down when Mars came inside the house, and said as he took
her hand in his own, "Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not at
home, but is gone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech is
barbarous."

She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest,
whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread
for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too
late that they were in a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for he had
turned back before reaching Lemnos, when his scout the sun told him what
was going on. He was in a furious passion, and stood in the vestibule
making a dreadful noise as he shouted to all the gods.

"Father Jove," he cried, "and all you other blessed gods who live for
ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that I will
show you. Jove's daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because I am
lame. She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built, whereas
I am a cripple--but my parents are to blame for that, not I; they ought
never to have begotten me. Come and see the pair together asleep on
my bed. It makes me furious to look at them. They are very fond of one
another, but I do not think they will lie there longer than they can
help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there, however, they
shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gave him for his
baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest."

On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encircling
Neptune came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but the
goddesses staid at home all of them for shame. Then the givers of all
good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared with
inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Vulcan had been,
whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying:

"Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See how
limping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest god
in heaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages."

Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, "Messenger
Mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains
were, would you, if you could sleep with Venus?"

"King Apollo," answered Mercury, "I only wish I might get the chance,
though there were three times as many chains--and you might look on, all
of you, gods and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if I could."

The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune took
it all seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free again.
"Let him go," he cried, "and I will undertake, as you require, that
he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among the
immortal gods."

"Do not," replied Vulcan, "ask me to do this; a bad man's bond is bad
security; what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should go away
and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?"

"Vulcan," said Neptune, "if Mars goes away without paying his damages,
I will pay you myself." So Vulcan answered, "In this case I cannot and
must not refuse you."

Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were
free they scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus to
Cyprus and to Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with
burnt offerings. Here the Graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil
of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her
in raiment of the most enchanting beauty.

Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians were
charmed as they heard him.

Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was no
one to compete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus had made
for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up towards
the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and caught it
with ease before it came down again. When they had done throwing the
ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and at the same time
kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one another, while all
the young men in the ring applauded and made a great stamping with their
feet. Then Ulysses said:

"King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the
world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I was astonished
as I saw them."

The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaeacians,
"Aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person of
singular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as
he may reasonably expect. There are twelve chief men among you, and
counting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a clean
cloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in
a lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so with a
light heart. As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apology and a
present too, for he has been rude."

Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, and
sent their servants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, "King
Alcinous, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. He
shall have my sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of
silver. I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into which
it fits. It will be worth a great deal to him."

As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, "Good
luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the
winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return,
for I understand you have been long away from home, and have gone
through much hardship."

To which Ulysses answered, "Good luck to you too my friend, and may the
gods grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword you
have given me along with your apology."

With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards
sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of
the donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here his
sons received them, and placed them under their mother's charge. Then
Alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.

"Wife," said he, turning to Queen Arete, "Go, fetch the best chest we
have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper on the
fire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also to
the careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have made
him; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that
will follow. I shall myself give him this golden goblet--which is of
exquisite workmanship--that he may be reminded of me for the rest of his
life whenever he makes a drink offering to Jove, or to any of the gods."
{70}

Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast as
they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear
fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became hot
as the flame played about the belly of the tripod. {71} Meanwhile Arete
brought a magnificent chest from her own room, and inside it she packed
all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the Phaeacians had
brought. Lastly she added a cloak and a good shirt from Alcinous, and
said to Ulysses:

"See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for
fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your
ship." {72}

When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast
with a bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upper
servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. He was very glad
of a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since he
left the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her had taken
as good care of him as though he had been a god. When the servants had
done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him a clean cloak
and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the guests who were sitting
over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of the bearing-posts
supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as she saw him
pass. "Farewell stranger," said she, "do not forget me when you are safe
at home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransom for having
saved your life."

And Ulysses said, "Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove the
mighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall I bless
you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved me."

When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper was
then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in the
favourite bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near
one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might lean
against it. Then Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of
fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant,
"Take this piece of pork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; for
all the pain his lays may cause me I will salute him none the less;
bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the muse
teaches them their songs and loves them."

The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who took
it and was very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the good
things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and
drink, Ulysses said to Demodocus, "Demodocus, there is no one in the
world whom I admire more than I do you. You must have studied under the
Muse, Jove's daughter, and under Apollo, so accurately do you sing the
return of the Achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. If you
were not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who
was. Now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horse
which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and which Ulysses got
by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the men who
afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I will
tell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you."

The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some of
the Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others, hidden
within the horse, {73} were waiting with Ulysses in the Trojan place
of assembly. For the Trojans themselves had drawn the horse into their
fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it, and
were in three minds as to what they should do. Some were for breaking it
up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top of the rock
on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the precipice; while
yet others were for letting it remain as an offering and propitiation
for the gods. And this was how they settled it in the end, for the city
was doomed when it took in that horse, within which were all the bravest
of the Argives waiting to bring death and destruction on the Trojans.
Anon he sang how the sons of the Achaeans issued from the horse, and
sacked the town, breaking out from their ambuscade. He sang how they
overran the city hither and thither and ravaged it, and how Ulysses went
raging like Mars along with Menelaus to the house of Deiphobus. It was
there that the fight raged most furiously, nevertheless by Minerva's
help he was victorious.

All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his
cheeks were wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throws
herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city
and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children. She
screams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping for
breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back
and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life of labour and
sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks--even so piteously did
Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except
Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs
that he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:

"Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease
his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. From
the moment that we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, our
guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. He is evidently
in great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy
ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will be much more as it should
be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that we
are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour, and any
one with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought to
treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.

"Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment nor
reserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more
polite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your
father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were
known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. There is no one,
neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for
people's fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born.
Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shape
their purpose accordingly and take you there. For the Phaeacians have
no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other nations have,
but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are thinking
about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the whole
world, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it is covered
with mist and cloud, so that there is no danger of being wrecked or
coming to any harm. Still I do remember hearing my father say that
Neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in the matter of
giving people escorts. He said that one of these days he should wreck a
ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted some one, {74} and
bury our city under a high mountain. This is what my father used to say,
but whether the god will carry out his threat or no is a matter which he
will decide for himself.

"And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering, and
in what countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoples themselves,
and of their cities--who were hostile, savage and uncivilised, and who,
on the other hand, hospitable and humane. Tell us also why you are made
so unhappy on hearing about the return of the Argive Danaans from Troy.
The gods arranged all this, and sent them their misfortunes in order
that future generations might have something to sing about. Did you
lose some brave kinsman of your wife's when you were before Troy? a
son-in-law or father-in-law--which are the nearest relations a man has
outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some brave and kindly-natured
comrade--for a good friend is as dear to a man as his own brother?"


Book IX

ULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY---THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI,
AND CYCLOPES.


And Ulysses answered, "King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bard
with such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better or
more delightful than when a whole people make merry together, with the
guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread
and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every
man. This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see. Now, however,
since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my
own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how to begin, nor yet
how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has been
laid heavily upon me.

"Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and
one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though I
live so far away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes, renowned
among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame ascends to
heaven. I live in Ithaca, where there is a high mountain called Neritum,
covered with forests; and not far from it there is a group of islands
very near to one another--Dulichium, Same, and the wooded island of
Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon, all highest up in the sea
towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it towards dawn. {75}
It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my eyes know none
that they better love to look upon. The goddess Calypso kept me with her
in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did also the cunning Aeaean
goddess Circe; but they could neither of them persuade me, for there
is nothing dearer to a man than his own country and his parents, and
however splendid a home he may have in a foreign country, if it be far
from father or mother, he does not care about it. Now, however, I will
tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by Jove's will I met
with on my return from Troy.

"When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which is
the city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people to
the sword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we divided
equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. I
then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very foolishly
would not obey me, so they staid there drinking much wine and killing
great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea shore. Meanwhile the Cicons
cried out for help to other Cicons who lived inland. These were more in
number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of war,
for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the occasion
served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as leaves and
bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so that we were
hard pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships, and the hosts
aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another. {76} So long as the day
waxed and it was still morning, we held our own against them, though
they were more in number than we; but as the sun went down, towards the
time when men loose their oxen, the Cicons got the better of us, and we
lost half a dozen men from every ship we had; so we got away with those
that were left.

"Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have
escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we
had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the
hands of the Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against us till it
blew a hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and
night sprang forth out of the heavens. We let the ships run before the
gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took
them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the land.
There we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike from toil and
distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we again raised
our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind and steersmen
direct our ship. I should have got home at that time unharmed had not
the North wind and the currents been against me as I was doubling Cape
Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island of Cythera.

"I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the
sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, who
live on a food that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed to take
in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near
the ships. When they had eaten and drunk I sent two of my company to
see what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had
a third man under them. They started at once, and went about among the
Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus,
which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring about
home, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened to
them, but were for staying and munching lotus {77} with the Lotus-eaters
without thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they wept
bitterly I forced them back to the ships and made them fast under the
benches. Then I told the rest to go on board at once, lest any of them
should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, so they
took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars.

"We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of
the lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant nor
plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and
grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes
yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them. They have no
laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of
high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take no
account of their neighbours.

"Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quite
close to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is over-run
with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never
disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen--who as a rule will suffer so
much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices--do not go there,
nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies a wilderness
untilled and unsown from year to year, and has no living thing upon it
but only goats. For the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet shipwrights who
could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city,
or sail over the sea to one another's country as people who have ships
can do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island, {78}
for it is a very good one, and would yield everything in due season.
There are meadows that in some places come right down to the sea
shore, well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do there
excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always
yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep. There is a good
harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need a ship be
moored, but all one has to do is to beach one's vessel and stay there
till the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At the head of
the harbour there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, and
there are poplars growing all round it.

"Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have
brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick mist
hung all round our ships; {79} the moon was hidden behind a mass of
clouds so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for
it, nor were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before
we found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached
the ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach
till daybreak.

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we admired
the island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove's daughters
roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. On
this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and
dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats. Heaven
sent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each ship got
nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to
the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we had plenty
of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we sacked
the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out. While we were
feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the Cyclopes,
which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires. We could
almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their sheep and
goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped down
upon the beach, and next morning I called a council.

"'Stay here, my brave fellows,' said I, 'all the rest of you, while I go
with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if they are
uncivilised savages, or a hospitable and humane race.'

"I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers; so
they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. When we
got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliff near
the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels. It was a station for
a great many sheep and goats, and outside there was a large yard, with
a high wall round it made of stones built into the ground and of trees
both pine and oak. This was the abode of a huge monster who was then
away from home shepherding his flocks. He would have nothing to do with
other people, but led the life of an outlaw. He was a horrid creature,
not like a human being at all, but resembling rather some crag that
stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a high mountain.

"I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all
but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. I also
took a goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by Maron,
son of Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron god of Ismarus, and
lived within the wooded precincts of the temple. When we were sacking
the city we respected him, and spared his life, as also his wife and
child; so he made me some presents of great value--seven talents of fine
gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweet wine, unblended,
and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a man nor maid in the house knew
about it, but only himself, his wife, and one housekeeper: when he drank
it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of wine, and yet the fragrance
from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that it was impossible to refrain
from drinking. I filled a large skin with this wine, and took a wallet
full of provisions with me, for my mind misgave me that I might have to
deal with some savage who would be of great strength, and would respect
neither right nor law.

"We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went inside
and took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were loaded
with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could hold.
They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets, then
the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones {80} all
kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels, bowls,
and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey. When they
saw all this, my men begged me to let them first steal some cheeses, and
make off with them to the ship; they would then return, drive down the
lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with them. It would have
been indeed better if we had done so but I would not listen to them, for
I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope that he might give me
a present. When, however, we saw him my poor men found him ill to deal
with.

"We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others
of them, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his
sheep. When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood
to light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with such a noise on
to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far end
of the cavern. Meanwhile he drove all the ewes inside, as well as the
she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams and
he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolled a huge stone to the mouth
of the cave--so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled waggons
would not be enough to draw it from its place against the doorway. When
he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats, all in due
course, and then let each of them have her own young. He curdled half
the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the other half he
poured into bowls that he might drink it for his supper. When he had got
through with all his work, he lit the fire, and then caught sight of us,
whereon he said:

"'Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, or do
you sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, and every
man's hand against you?'

"We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous
form, but I managed to say, 'We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy,
but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far
out of our course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who
has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great
a city and killing so many people. We therefore humbly pray you to show
us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors may
reasonably expect. May your excellency fear the wrath of heaven, for we
are your suppliants, and Jove takes all respectable travellers under his
protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants and foreigners in
distress.'

"To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, 'Stranger,' said he, 'you are
a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk to me, indeed,
about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes do not care
about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so much stronger
than they. I shall not spare either yourself or your companions out of
any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for doing so. And now
tell me where you made your ship fast when you came on shore. Was it
round the point, or is she lying straight off the land?'

"He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in that
way, so I answered with a lie; 'Neptune,' said I, 'sent my ship on to
the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We were driven
on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me escaped
the jaws of death.'

"The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a
sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down
upon the ground as though they had been puppies. Their brains were shed
upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore
them limb from limb and supped upon them. He gobbled them up like a lion
in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without leaving
anything uneaten. As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to heaven
on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not know what else to do; but
when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed down his
meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched himself
full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep. I was at
first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into his vitals,
but I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be lost, for we
should never be able to shift the stone which the monster had put in
front of the door. So we stayed sobbing and sighing where we were till
morning came.

"When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lit
his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let
each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his
work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his
morning's meal. Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone
away from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it back
again--as easily as though he were merely clapping the lid on to a
quiver full of arrows. As soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried
'Shoo, shoo,' after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so I was
left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself with
glory.

"In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: The
Cyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens;
it was of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for
a staff as soon as it should be dry. It was so huge that we could
only compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of large
burden, and able to venture out into open sea. I went up to this club
and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men and
told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do,
and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fire
to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was
lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of
them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the
monster's eye while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whom
I should have chosen, and I myself made five. In the evening the wretch
came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave--this
time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; I
suppose some fancy 