er. Then the men loosed the hawsers and
took their places on the benches. Minerva sent them a fair wind from
the West, {22} that whistled over the deep blue waves {23} whereon
Telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and they
did as he told them. They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank,
raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then they hoisted their
white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide. As the sail bellied out
with the wind, the ship flew through the deep blue water, and the foam
hissed against her bows as she sped onward. Then they made all fast
throughout the ship, filled the mixing bowls to the brim, and made
drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from everlasting, but more
particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove.

Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night
from dark till dawn,


Book III

TELEMACHUS VISITS NESTOR AT PYLOS.

but as the sun was rising from the fair sea {24} into the firmament of
heaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos the
city of Neleus. Now the people of Pylos were gathered on the sea shore
to offer sacrifice of black bulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake.
There were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were
nine bulls to each guild. As they were eating the inward meats {25}
and burning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of Neptune,
Telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their ship
to anchor, and went ashore.

Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her. Presently she said,
"Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have taken
this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and how he
came by his end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may see what he has
got to tell us. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell no lies,
for he is an excellent person."

"But how, Mentor," replied Telemachus, "dare I go up to Nestor, and
how am I to address him? I have never yet been used to holding long
conversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who
is so much older than myself."

"Some things, Telemachus," answered Minerva, "will be suggested to
you by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for I am
assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birth
until now."

She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps till they
reached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people were assembled.
There they found Nestor sitting with his sons, while his company round
him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces of meat on to the
spits {26} while other pieces were cooking. When they saw the strangers
they crowded round them, took them by the hand and bade them take their
places. Nestor's son Pisistratus at once offered his hand to each of
them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that were lying on the
sands near his father and his brother Thrasymedes. Then he gave them
their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for them into a
golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting her at the same
time.

"Offer a prayer, sir," said he, "to King Neptune, for it is his feast
that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink
offering, pass the cup to your friend that he may do so also. I doubt
not that he too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without
God in the world. Still he is younger than you are, and is much of an
age with myself, so I will give you the precedence."

As he spoke he handed her the cup. Minerva thought it very right and
proper of him to have given it to herself first; {27} she accordingly
began praying heartily to Neptune. "O thou," she cried, "that encirclest
the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants that call upon
thee. More especially we pray thee send down thy grace on Nestor and
on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the Pylian people some
handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering you. Lastly,
grant Telemachus and myself a happy issue, in respect of the matter that
has brought us in our ship to Pylos."

When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to
Telemachus and he prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer meats were
roasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man his
portion and they all made an excellent dinner. As soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak.

"Now," said he, "that our guests have done their dinner, it will be best
to ask them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are you, and from
what port have you sailed? Are you traders? or do you sail the seas as
rovers with your hand against every man, and every man's hand against
you?"

Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to ask
about his father and get himself a good name.

"Nestor," said he, "son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, you ask
whence we come, and I will tell you. We come from Ithaca under Neritum,
{28} and the matter about which I would speak is of private not public
import. I seek news of my unhappy father Ulysses, who is said to have
sacked the town of Troy in company with yourself. We know what fate
befell each one of the other heroes who fought at Troy, but as regards
Ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that he is dead
at all, for no one can certify us in what place he perished, nor say
whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at sea amid the
waves of Amphitrite. Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, if haply
you may be pleased to tell me of his melancholy end, whether you saw it
with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for he was
a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for me,
but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my brave father
Ulysses ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, when you
Achaeans were harassed among the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my
favour and tell me truly all."

"My friend," answered Nestor, "you recall a time of much sorrow to
my mind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, while
privateering under Achilles, and when fighting before the great city
of king Priam. Our best men all of them fell there--Ajax, Achilles,
Patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilochus, a man
singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant. But we suffered much more
than this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story? Though
you were to stay here and question me for five years, or even six, I
could not tell you all that the Achaeans suffered, and you would turn
homeward weary of my tale before it ended. Nine long years did we try
every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us; during
all this time there was no one who could compare with your father in
subtlety--if indeed you are his son--I can hardly believe my eyes--and
you talk just like him too--no one would say that people of such
different ages could speak so much alike. He and I never had any kind
of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, but in
singleness of heart and purpose we advised the Argives how all might be
ordered for the best.

"When, however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sail
in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex the
Argives on their homeward voyage; for they had not all been either
wise or understanding, and hence many came to a bad end through the
displeasure of Jove's daughter Minerva, who brought about a quarrel
between the two sons of Atreus.

"The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be, for
it was sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine. When they explained
why they had called the people together, it seemed that Menelaus was
for sailing homeward at once, and this displeased Agamemnon, who thought
that we should wait till we had offered hecatombs to appease the anger
of Minerva. Fool that he was, he might have known that he would not
prevail with her, for when the gods have made up their minds they do not
change them lightly. So the two stood bandying hard words, whereon the
Achaeans sprang to their feet with a cry that rent the air, and were of
two minds as to what they should do.

"That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatching
mischief against us. But in the morning some of us drew our ships into
the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest,
about half in number, stayed behind with Agamemnon. We--the other
half--embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had
smoothed the sea. When we reached Tenedos we offered sacrifices to the
gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel Jove, however, did not yet
mean that we should do so, and raised a second quarrel in the course of
which some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed away under
Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon; but I, and all the ships
that were with me pressed forward, for I saw that mischief was brewing.
The son of Tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with him. Later on
Menelaus joined us at Lesbos, and found us making up our minds about our
course--for we did not know whether to go outside Chios by the island
of Psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside Chios, over against the
stormy headland of Mimas. So we asked heaven for a sign, and were shown
one to the effect that we should be soonest out of danger if we headed
our ships across the open sea to Euboea. This we therefore did, and a
fair wind sprang up which gave us a quick passage during the night to
Geraestus, {29} where we offered many sacrifices to Neptune for
having helped us so far on our way. Four days later Diomed and his men
stationed their ships in Argos, but I held on for Pylos, and the wind
never fell light from the day when heaven first made it fair for me.

"Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anything
about the others. I know neither who got home safely nor who were lost
but, as in duty bound, I will give you without reserve the reports that
have reached me since I have been here in my own house. They say the
Myrmidons returned home safely under Achilles' son Neoptolemus; so also
did the valiant son of Poias, Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again, lost no men
at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the field got safe
home with him to Crete. No matter how far out of the world you live, you
will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he came to at the hands of
Aegisthus--and a fearful reckoning did Aegisthus presently pay. See what
a good thing it is for a man to leave a son behind him to do as Orestes
did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer of his noble father. You
too, then--for you are a tall smart-looking fellow--show your mettle and
make yourself a name in story."

"Nestor son of Neleus," answered Telemachus, "honour to the Achaean
name, the Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through all
time for he has avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might grant
me to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who
are ill treating me and plotting my ruin; but the gods have no such
happiness in store for me and for my father, so we must bear it as best
we may."

"My friend," said Nestor, "now that you remind me, I remember to have
heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards
you and are making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this tamely,
or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you? Who knows but
what Ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in full,
either single-handed or with a force of Achaeans behind him? If Minerva
were to take as great a liking to you as she did to Ulysses when we were
fighting before Troy (for I never yet saw the gods so openly fond of any
one as Minerva then was of your father), if she would take as good care
of you as she did of him, these wooers would soon some of them forget
their wooing."

Telemachus answered, "I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be far
too much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of it. Even though the
gods themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall me."

On this Minerva said, "Telemachus, what are you talking about? Heaven
has a long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, I
should not care how much I suffered before getting home, provided I
could be safe when I was once there. I would rather this, than get home
quickly, and then be killed in my own house as Agamemnon was by the
treachery of Aegisthus and his wife. Still, death is certain, and when
a man's hour is come, not even the gods can save him, no matter how fond
they are of him."

"Mentor," answered Telemachus, "do not let us talk about it any more.
There is no chance of my father's ever coming back; the gods have long
since counselled his destruction. There is something else, however,
about which I should like to ask Nestor, for he knows much more than any
one else does. They say he has reigned for three generations so that it
is like talking to an immortal. Tell me, therefore, Nestor, and tell
me true; how did Agamemnon come to die in that way? What was Menelaus
doing? And how came false Aegisthus to kill so far better a man than
himself? Was Menelaus away from Achaean Argos, voyaging elsewhither
among mankind, that Aegisthus took heart and killed Agamemnon?"

"I will tell you truly," answered Nestor, "and indeed you have yourself
divined how it all happened. If Menelaus when he got back from Troy
had found Aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been no
barrow heaped up for him, not even when he was dead, but he would have
been thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not a woman would
have mourned him, for he had done a deed of great wickedness; but we
were over there, fighting hard at Troy, and Aegisthus, who was taking
his ease quietly in the heart of Argos, cajoled Agamemnon's wife
Clytemnestra with incessant flattery.

"At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for she
was of a good natural disposition; {30} moreover there was a bard with
her, to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for Troy,
that he was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled
her destruction, Aegisthus carried this bard off to a desert island and
left him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon--after which she
went willingly enough to the house of Aegisthus. Then he offered many
burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples with tapestries
and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond his expectations.

"Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good terms
with one another. When we got to Sunium, which is the point of Athens,
Apollo with his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman of
Menelaus' ship (and never man knew better how to handle a vessel in
rough weather) so that he died then and there with the helm in his hand,
and Menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had to wait in order
to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral rites. Presently, when
he too could put to sea again, and had sailed on as far as the Malean
heads, Jove counselled evil against him and made it blow hard till the
waves ran mountains high. Here he divided his fleet and took the one
half towards Crete where the Cydonians dwell round about the waters of
the river Iardanus. There is a high headland hereabouts stretching out
into the sea from a place called Gortyn, and all along this part of the
coast as far as Phaestus the sea runs high when there is a south wind
blowing, but after Phaestus the coast is more protected, for a small
headland can make a great shelter. Here this part of the fleet was
driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crews just managed to save
themselves. As for the other five ships, they were taken by winds and
seas to Egypt, where Menelaus gathered much gold and substance among
people of an alien speech. Meanwhile Aegisthus here at home plotted his
evil deed. For seven years after he had killed Agamemnon he ruled in
Mycene, and the people were obedient under him, but in the eighth year
Orestes came back from Athens to be his bane, and killed the murderer
of his father. Then he celebrated the funeral rites of his mother and
of false Aegisthus by a banquet to the people of Argos, and on that very
day Menelaus came home, {31} with as much treasure as his ships could
carry.

"Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far
from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your
house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will
have been on a fool's errand. Still, I should advise you by all means
to go and visit Menelaus, who has lately come off a voyage among such
distant peoples as no man could ever hope to get back from, when the
winds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds
cannot fly the distance in a twelve-month, so vast and terrible are the
seas that they must cross. Go to him, therefore, by sea, and take your
own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have a
chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort you to
Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he
will tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person."

As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said, "Sir,
all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues of the
victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings to
Neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed
time. People should go away early and not keep late hours at a religious
festival."

Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying. Men
servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled
the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving
every man his drink offering; then they threw the tongues of the victims
into the fire, and stood up to make their drink offerings. When they
had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded,
Minerva and Telemachus were for going on board their ship, but Nestor
caught them up at once and stayed them.

"Heaven and the immortal gods," he exclaimed, "forbid that you should
leave my house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I am so poor and
short of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable to
find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? Let me tell you
I have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son of
my old friend Ulysses to camp down on the deck of a ship--not while I
live--nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as I
have done."

Then Minerva answered, "Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be much
better that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall
return with you and sleep at your house, but I must go back to give
orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart. I am the only older
person among them; the rest are all young men of Telemachus' own age,
who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so I must return to the
ship and sleep there. Moreover to-morrow I must go to the Cauconians
where I have a large sum of money long owing to me. As for Telemachus,
now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in a chariot, and let
one of your sons go with him. Be pleased to also provide him with your
best and fleetest horses."

When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and all
marvelled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished, and took Telemachus
by the hand. "My friend," said he, "I see that you are going to be a
great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while you are
still so young. This can have been none other of those who dwell in
heaven than Jove's redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, who shewed
such favour towards your brave father among the Argives. Holy queen," he
continued, "vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my good wife,
and my children. In return, I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed
heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the
yoke. I will gild her horns, and will offer her up to you in sacrifice."

Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer. He then led the way to
his own house, followed by his sons and sons in law. When they had got
there and had taken their places on the benches and seats, he mixed them
a bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when the housekeeper took
the lid off the jar that held it. As he mixed the wine, he prayed much
and made drink offerings to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove.
Then, when they had made their drink offerings and had drunk each as
much as he was minded, the others went home to bed each in his own
abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in the room that was over the
gateway along with Pisistratus, who was the only unmarried son now left
him. As for himself, he slept in an inner room of the house, with the
queen his wife by his side.

Now when the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Nestor left
his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble
that stood in front of his house. Here aforetime sat Neleus, peer of
gods in counsel, but he was now dead, and had gone to the house of
Hades; so Nestor sat in his seat sceptre in hand, as guardian of the
public weal. His sons as they left their rooms gathered round him,
Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymedes; the sixth son
was Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined them they made him sit with
them. Nestor then addressed them.

"My sons," said he, "make haste to do as I shall bid you. I wish first
and foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifested
herself visibly to me during yesterday's festivities. Go, then, one or
other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer,
and come on here with it at once. Another must go to Telemachus' ship,
and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel.
Some one else will run and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to gild the
horns of the heifer. The rest, stay all of you where you are; tell the
maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats,
and logs of wood for a burnt offering. Tell them also to bring me some
clear spring water."

On this they hurried off on their several errands. The heifer was
brought in from the plain, and Telemachus's crew came from the ship; the
goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he worked his
gold, and Minerva herself came to accept the sacrifice. Nestor gave out
the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer that the goddess
might have pleasure in their beauty. Then Stratius and Echephron brought
her in by the horns; Aretus fetched water from the house in a ewer that
had a flower pattern on it, and in his other hand he held a basket of
barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood by with a sharp axe, ready to
strike the heifer, while Perseus held a bucket. Then Nestor began with
washing his hands and sprinkling the barley meal, and he offered many
a prayer to Minerva as he threw a lock from the heifer's head upon the
fire.

When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal {32}
Thrasymedes dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with a stroke
that cut through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the
daughters and daughters in law of Nestor, and his venerable wife
Eurydice (she was eldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed with delight.
Then they lifted the heifer's head from off the ground, and Pisistratus
cut her throat. When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut
her up. They cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them
round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top
of them; then Nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over
them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in
their hands. When the thighs were burned and they had tasted the inward
meats, they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the
spits and toasted them over the fire.

Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor's youngest daughter, washed
Telemachus. When she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she
brought him a fair mantle and shirt, {33} and he looked like a god as
he came from the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor. When
the outer meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to
dinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept
pouring them out their wine in cups of gold. As soon as they had had
enough to eat and drink Nestor said, "Sons, put Telemachus's horses to
the chariot that he may start at once."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the fleet
horses to the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up a provision
of bread, wine, and sweet meats fit for the sons of princes. Then
Telemachus got into the chariot, while Pisistratus gathered up the reins
and took his seat beside him. He lashed the horses on and they flew
forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving the high citadel of
Pylos behind them. All that day did they travel, swaying the yoke upon
their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all the land.
Then they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son to Ortilochus
and grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night and Diocles
entertained them hospitably. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered
Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and drove out through the
gateway under the echoing gatehouse. {34} Pisistratus lashed the horses
on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently they came to the corn
lands of the open country, and in the course of time completed their
journey, so well did their steeds take them. {35}

Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,


Book IV

THE VISIT TO KING MENELAUS, WHO TELLS HIS STORY--MEANWHILE THE SUITORS
IN ITHACA PLOT AGAINST TELEMACHUS.

they reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon, where they drove straight
to the abode of Menelaus {36} [and found him in his own house, feasting
with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son, and also of
his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of that valiant warrior
Achilles. He had given his consent and promised her to him while he was
still at Troy, and now the gods were bringing the marriage about; so he
was sending her with chariots and horses to the city of the Myrmidons
over whom Achilles' son was reigning. For his only son he had found a
bride from Sparta, {37} the daughter of Alector. This son, Megapenthes,
was born to him of a bondwoman, for heaven vouchsafed Helen no more
children after she had borne Hermione, who was fair as golden Venus
herself.

So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and making merry
in his house. There was a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre,
while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of them when the
man struck up with his tune.] {38}

Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate,
whereon Eteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he saw
them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his Master. He went close
up to him and said, "Menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two
men, who look like sons of Jove. What are we to do? Shall we take their
horses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?"

Menelaus was very angry and said, "Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you never
used to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton. Take their horses
out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have supper;
you and I have staid often enough at other people's houses before we got
back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace henceforward."

So Eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him. They
took their sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast to the
mangers, and gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then they leaned
the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led the way into
the house. Telemachus and Pisistratus were astonished when they saw it,
for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon; then, when they had
admired everything to their heart's content, they went into the bath
room and washed themselves.

When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they
brought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by
the side of Menelaus. A maid-servant brought them water in a beautiful
golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their
hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. An upper servant brought
them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the
house, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and
set cups of gold by their side.

Menelaus then greeted them saying, "Fall to, and welcome; when you have
done supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as
you cannot have been lost. You must be descended from a line of
sceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as you
are."

On this he handed them {39} a piece of fat roast loin, which had been
set near him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the
good things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat
and drink, Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so close
that no one might hear, "Look, Pisistratus, man after my own heart,
see the gleam of bronze and gold--of amber, {40} ivory, and silver.
Everything is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian
Jove. I am lost in admiration."

Menelaus overheard him and said, "No one, my sons, can hold his own
with Jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but among
mortal men--well, there may be another who has as much wealth as I
have, or there may not; but at all events I have travelled much and have
undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before I could
get home with my fleet. I went to Cyprus, Phoenicia and the Egyptians;
I went also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and the Erembians, and to
Libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are born, and the sheep
lamb down three times a year. Every one in that country, whether master
or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good milk, for the ewes yield
all the year round. But while I was travelling and getting great riches
among these people, my brother was secretly and shockingly murdered
through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that I have no pleasure in
being lord of all this wealth. Whoever your parents may be they must
have told you about all this, and of my heavy loss in the ruin {41} of a
stately mansion fully and magnificently furnished. Would that I had only
a third of what I now have so that I had stayed at home, and all those
were living who perished on the plain of Troy, far from Argos. I often
grieve, as I sit here in my house, for one and all of them. At times
I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently I leave off again, for crying is
cold comfort and one soon tires of it. Yet grieve for these as I may,
I do so for one man more than for them all. I cannot even think of him
without loathing both food and sleep, so miserable does he make me, for
no one of all the Achaeans worked so hard or risked so much as he did.
He took nothing by it, and has left a legacy of sorrow to myself, for he
has been gone a long time, and we know not whether he is alive or
dead. His old father, his long-suffering wife Penelope, and his son
Telemachus, whom he left behind him an infant in arms, are plunged in
grief on his account."

Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as he bethought
him of his father. Tears fell from his eyes as he heard him thus
mentioned, so that he held his cloak before his face with both hands.
When Menelaus saw this he doubted whether to let him choose his own time
for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was all about.

While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaulted and
perfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself. Adraste brought her
a seat, Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her the silver
work-box which Alcandra wife of Polybus had given her. Polybus lived in
Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world; he gave
Menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and ten talents of
gold; besides all this, his wife gave Helen some beautiful presents, to
wit, a golden distaff, and a silver work box that ran on wheels, with a
gold band round the top of it. Phylo now placed this by her side, full
of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with violet coloured wool was
laid upon the top of it. Then Helen took her seat, put her feet upon the
footstool, and began to question her husband. {42}

"Do we know, Menelaus," said she, "the names of these strangers who
have come to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong?--but I cannot help
saying what I think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman so like
somebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what to think)
as this young man is like Telemachus, whom Ulysses left as a baby behind
him, when you Achaeans went to Troy with battle in your hearts, on
account of my most shameless self."

"My dear wife," replied Menelaus, "I see the likeness just as you do.
His hands and feet are just like Ulysses; so is his hair, with the shape
of his head and the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when I was talking
about Ulysses, and saying how much he had suffered on my account, tears
fell from his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle."

Then Pisistratus said, "Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right in
thinking that this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest, and
is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whose
conversation is so divinely interesting as your own. My father, Nestor,
sent me to escort him hither, for he wanted to know whether you could
give him any counsel or suggestion. A son has always trouble at home
when his father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and this
is how Telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent, and there is
no one among his own people to stand by him."

"Bless my heart," replied Menelaus, "then I am receiving a visit from
the son of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake.
I had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when
heaven had granted us a safe return from beyond the seas. I should have
founded a city for him in Argos, and built him a house. I should have
made him leave Ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, and
should have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities that
are subject to me. We should thus have seen one another continually,
and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy an
intercourse. I suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great good
fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home at
all."

Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping. Helen wept,
Telemachus wept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep his
eyes from filling, when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus whom
the son of bright Dawn had killed. Thereon he said to Menelaus,

"Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told me
you were a person of rare and excellent understanding. If, then, it be
possible, do as I would urge you. I am not fond of crying while I am
getting my supper. Morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon
I care not how much I cry for those that are dead and gone. This is all
we can do for the poor things. We can only shave our heads for them and
wring the tears from our cheeks. I had a brother who died at Troy; he
was by no means the worst man there; you are sure to have known him--his
name was Antilochus; I never set eyes upon him myself, but they say that
he was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant."

"Your discretion, my friend," answered Menelaus, "is beyond your years.
It is plain you take after your father. One can soon see when a man
is son to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and
offspring--and it has blessed Nestor from first to last all his days,
giving him a green old age in his own house, with sons about him who are
both well disposed and valiant. We will put an end therefore to all this
weeping, and attend to our supper again. Let water be poured over our
hands. Telemachus and I can talk with one another fully in the morning."

On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands
and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.

Then Jove's daughter Helen bethought her of another matter. She drugged
the wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour.
Whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the rest
of the day, not even though his father and mother both of them drop down
dead, or he sees a brother or a son hewn in pieces before his very eyes.
This drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had been given to Helen
by Polydamna wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt, where there grow all sorts
of herbs, some good to put into the mixing bowl and others poisonous.
Moreover, every one in the whole country is a skilled physician, for
they are of the race of Paeeon. When Helen had put this drug in the
bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round, she said:

"Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable
men (which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and evil,
and can do what he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while I
tell you a tale in season. I cannot indeed name every single one of the
exploits of Ulysses, but I can say what he did when he was before Troy,
and you Achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties. He covered himself
with wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered the
enemy's city looking like a menial or a beggar, and quite different
from what he did when he was among his own people. In this disguise
he entered the city of Troy, and no one said anything to him. I alone
recognised him and began to question him, but he was too cunning for me.
When, however, I had washed and anointed him and had given him clothes,
and after I had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to the Trojans
till he had got safely back to his own camp and to the ships, he told me
all that the Achaeans meant to do. He killed many Trojans and got much
information before he reached the Argive camp, for all which things the
Trojan women made lamentation, but for my own part I was glad, for my
heart was beginning to yearn after my home, and I was unhappy about
the wrong that Venus had done me in taking me over there, away from
my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is indeed by no
means deficient either in person or understanding."

Then Menelaus said, "All that you have been saying, my dear wife, is
true. I have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but
I have never seen such another man as Ulysses. What endurance too,
and what courage he displayed within the wooden horse, wherein all the
bravest of the Argives were lying in wait to bring death and destruction
upon the Trojans. {43} At that moment you came up to us; some god
who wished well to the Trojans must have set you on to it and you had
Deiphobus with you. Three times did you go all round our hiding place
and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and mimicked
all our wives--Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats inside heard what
a noise you made. Diomed and I could not make up our minds whether to
spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but Ulysses
held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except Anticlus, who
was beginning to answer you, when Ulysses clapped his two brawny hands
over his mouth, and kept them there. It was this that saved us all, for
he muzzled Anticlus till Minerva took you away again."

"How sad," exclaimed Telemachus, "that all this was of no avail to save
him, nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be pleased to send us
all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep."

On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was in
the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread coverlets
on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to wear. So
the maids went out, carrying a torch, and made the beds, to which
a man-servant presently conducted the strangers. Thus, then, did
Telemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while the son
of Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen by his side.

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Menelaus rose
and dressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet,
girded his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like an
immortal god. Then, taking a seat near Telemachus he said:

"And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage to
Lacedaemon? Are you on public, or private business? Tell me all about
it."

"I have come, sir," replied Telemachus, "to see if you can tell me
anything about my father. I am being eaten out of house and home; my
fair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who keep
killing great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of paying
their addresses to my mother. Therefore, I am suppliant at your knees if
haply you may tell me about my father's melancholy end, whether you saw
it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller; for he was
a man born to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for myself,
but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw. If my brave father
Ulysses ever did you loyal service either by word or deed, when you
Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my
favour and tell me truly all."

Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. "So," he exclaimed,
"these cowards would usurp a brave man's bed? A hind might as well lay
her new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the
forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to his lair
will make short work with the pair of them--and so will Ulysses with
these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still
the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and
threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans cheered him--if he is still
such and were to come near these suitors, they would have a short shrift
and a sorry wedding. As regards your questions, however, I will not
prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without concealment all
that the old man of the sea told me.

"I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt, for
my hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are very
strict about having their dues. Now off Egypt, about as far as a ship
can sail in a day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is an
island called Pharos--it has a good harbour from which vessels can
get out into open sea when they have taken in water--and here the gods
becalmed me twenty days without so much as a breath of fair wind to help
me forward. We should have run clean out of provisions and my men would
have starved, if a goddess had not taken pity upon me and saved me in
the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus, the old man of the sea, for
she had taken a great fancy to me.

"She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for the
men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the
hope of catching a fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger.
'Stranger,' said she, 'it seems to me that you like starving in this
way--at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day
after day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying by
inches.'

"'Let me tell you,' said I, 'whichever of the goddesses you may happen
to be, that I am not staying here of my own accord, but must have
offended the gods that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for the gods
know everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering me in
this way, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my
home.'

"'Stranger,' replied she, 'I will make it all quite clear to you. There
is an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts and whose name
is Proteus. He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father; he is
Neptune's head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom of
the sea. If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will tell you about
your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to sail the
sea so as to reach your home. He will also tell you, if you so will, all
that has been going on at your house both good and bad, while you have
been away on your long and dangerous journey.'

"'Can you show me,' said I, 'some stratagem by means of which I may
catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding me out? For a
god is not easily caught--not by a mortal man.'

"'Stranger,' said she, 'I will make it all quite clear to you. About the
time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of the sea
comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that furs the
water over his head. As soon as he has come up he lies down, and goes to
sleep in a great sea cave, where the seals--Halosydne's chickens as they
call them--come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep in shoals
all round him; and a very strong and fish-like smell do they bring with
them. {44} Early to-morrow morning I will take you to this place and
will lay you in ambush. Pick out, therefore, the three best men you have
in your fleet, and I will tell you all the tricks that the old man will
play you.

"'First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when he
has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go to sleep
among them, as a shepherd among his sheep. The moment you see that he is
asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, for he
will do his very utmost to get away from you. He will turn himself into
every kind of creature that goes upon the earth, and will become also
both fire and water; but you must hold him fast and grip him tighter
and tighter, till he begins to talk to you and comes back to what he was
when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken your hold and let him
go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that is angry with you,
and what you must do to reach your home over the seas.'

"Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to
the place where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was
clouded with care as I went along. When I reached my ship we got supper
ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.

"When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I took the three
men on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and went along by
the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile the goddess fetched
me up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all of them just
skinned, for she meant playing a trick upon her father. Then she dug
four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we should come up.
When we were close to her, she made us lie down in the pits one after
the other, and threw a seal skin over each of us. Our ambuscade would
have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy seals was most
distressing {45}--who would go to bed with a sea monster if he could
help it?--but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought of something
that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under each man's
nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of the seals.
{46}

"We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the seals
come up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon the old man
of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat seals he went over
them and counted them. We were among the first he counted, and he never
suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep as soon as he had
done counting. Then we rushed upon him with a shout and seized him; on
which he began at once with his old tricks, and changed himself first
into a lion with a great mane; then all of a sudden he became a dragon,
a leopard, a wild boar; the next moment he was running water, and then
again directly he was a tree, but we stuck to him and never lost hold,
till at last the cunning old creature became distressed, and said,
'Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, that hatched this plot with
you for snaring me and seizing me against my will? What do you want?'

"'You know that yourself, old man,' I answered, 'you will gain nothing
by trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept so long in this
island, and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am losing
all heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the
immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail
the sea so as to reach my home?'

"Then,' he said, 'if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly,
you must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the gods before
embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to your
friends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the heaven-fed
stream of Egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal gods that
reign in heaven. When you have done this they will let you finish your
voyage.'

"I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that long and
terrible voyage to Egypt; {47} nevertheless, I answered, 'I will do all,
old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me true,
whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when we set
sail from Troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them came
to a bad end either on board his own ship or among his friends when the
days of his fighting were done.'

"'Son of Atreus,' he answered, 'why ask me? You had better not know what
I can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heard my
story. Many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but many
still remain, and only two of the chief men among the Achaeans
perished during their return home. As for what happened on the field of
battle--you were there yourself. A third Achaean leader is still at sea,
alive, but hindered from returning. Ajax was wrecked, for Neptune drove
him on to the great rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he let him get safe
out of the water, and in spite of all Minerva's hatred he would have
escaped death, if he had not ruined himself by boasting. He said the
gods could not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and when
Neptune heard this large talk, he seized his trident in his two brawny
hands, and split the rock of Gyrae in two pieces. The base remained
where it was, but the part on which Ajax was sitting fell headlong
into the sea and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt water and was
drowned.

"'Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, but when
he was just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was caught
by a heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely against his
will, and drove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell, but
where Aegisthus was then living. By and by, however, it seemed as though
he was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the wind into its
old quarter and they reached home; whereon Agamemnon kissed his native
soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in his own country.

"'Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch, and
to whom he had promised two talents of gold. This man had been looking
out for a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give him the
slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by,
he went and told Aegisthus, who at once began to lay a plot for him. He
picked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade on
one side the cloister, while on the opposite side he prepared a banquet.
Then he sent his chariots and horsemen to Agamemnon, and invited him to
the feast, but he meant foul play. He got him there, all unsuspicious of
the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when the banquet was
over as though he were butchering an ox in the shambles; not one of
Agamemnon's followers was left alive, nor yet one of Aegisthus', but
they were all killed there in the cloisters.'

"Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him. I sat down
upon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bear to live
nor look upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had had my fill of
weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea said, 'Son
of Atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly; it can
do no manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever you can,
for Aegisthus may be still alive, and even though Orestes has been
beforehand with you in killing him, you may yet come in for his
funeral.'

"On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, 'I know,
then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whom
you spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or is
he dead? Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.'

"'The third man,' he answered, 'is Ulysses who dwells in Ithaca. I
can see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph
Calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home for
he has no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. As for your own
end, Menelaus, you shall not die in Argos, but the gods will take you to
the Elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world. There fair-haired
Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any where else in
the world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor hail, nor snow, but
Oceanus breathes ever with a West wind that sings softly from the sea,
and gives fresh life to all men. This will happen to you because you
have married Helen, and are Jove's son-in-law.'

"As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the
ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I went
along. When we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night was
falling, and camped down upon the beach. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and put
our masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, took
our seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea with our oars. I
again stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered
hecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeased
heaven's anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that his
name might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home, for
the gods sent me a fair wind.

"And now for yourself--stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and I
will then speed you on your way. I will make you a noble present of a
chariot and three horses. I will also give you a beautiful chalice
that so long as you live you may think of me whenever you make a
drink-offering to the immortal gods."

"Son of Atreus," replied Telemachus, "do not press me to stay longer; I
should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; I find
your conversation so delightful that I should never once wish myself at
home with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylos are already
impatient, and you are detaining me from them. As for any present you
may be disposed to make me, I had rather that it should be a piece of
plate. I will take no horses back with me to Ithaca, but will leave them
to adorn your own stables, for you have much flat ground in your kingdom
where lotus thrives, as also meadow-sweet and wheat and barley, and oats
with their white and spreading ears; whereas in Ithaca we have neither
open fields nor racecourses, and the country is more fit for goats than
horses, and I like it the better for that. {48} None of our islands have
much level ground, suitable for horses, and Ithaca least of all."

Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus's hand within his own. "What you
say," said he, "shows that you come of good family. I both can, and
will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most
precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing bowl by Vulcan's
own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold.
Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of a visit
which I paid him when I returned thither on my homeward journey. I will
make you a present of it."

Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king's house. They
brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for them to
take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the courts].
{49}

Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at
a mark on the levelled ground in front of Ulysses' house, and were
behaving with all their old insolence. Antinous and Eurymachus, who were
their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, were sitting
together when Noemon son of Phronius came up and said to Antinous,

"Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos?
He has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I have
twelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet
broken in, and I want to bring one of them over here and break him."

They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that
Telemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus. They thought he was
only away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the
swineherd; so Antinous said, "When did he go? Tell me truly, and
what young men did he take with him? Were they freemen or his own
bondsmen--for he might manage that too? Tell me also, did you let him
have the ship of your own free will because he asked you, or did he take
it without your leave?"

"I lent it him," answered Noemon, "what else could I do when a man of
his position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige him? I
could not possibly