eating up his estate?"

Minerva answered, "Never mind about him, I sent him that he might be
well spoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty, but
is staying quite comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded with
abundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and are lying
in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home. I do
not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are
now eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves."

As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with
wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over his
whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine ones;
she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about him, and a
tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave him an
undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with a staff
and a wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for him to sling it over
his shoulder.

When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess
went straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus.


Book XIV

ULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.

Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the
wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the
place where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was
the most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front of his
hut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could be
seen from far. He had made them spacious {126} and fair to see, with
a free run for the pigs all round them; he had built them during his
master's absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground,
without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them
on top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of
oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside he had
built twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in. There were
fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but the
boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors
kept on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best he
had continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the
herdsman's four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always
with them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of
sandals {127} from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were out
herding the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to
town with a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they
might sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.

When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at
him, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of
the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn by
them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide,
rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off
by shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to Ulysses, "Old
man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you
would have got me into trouble. The gods have given me quite enough
worries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am in
continual grief on his account. I have to attend swine for other people
to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starving
in some distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fill
of bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about your
misfortunes."

On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of
this he threw the shaggy chamois skin--a great thick one--on which he
used to sleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome,
and said "May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your heart's
desire in return for the kind way in which you have received me."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Stranger, though a still
poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult him,
for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what you
can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have young
lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for heaven has
hindered the return of him who would have been always good to me and
given me something of my own--a house, a piece of land, a good looking
wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who has worked
hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as they have mine
in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown old here he would
have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I wish that Helen's
whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been the death of many a
good man. It was this matter that took my master to Ilius, the land of
noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of king Agamemnon."

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought
back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before
Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over
with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of
ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.

"Fall to, stranger," said he, "on a dish of servant's pork. The fat pigs
have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or scruple; but
the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and respect those who do
what is lawful and right. Even the fierce freebooters who go raiding on
other people's land, and Jove gives them their spoil--even they,
when they have filled their ships and got home again live
conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but some god
seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone; they
will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their offers of
marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force, without fear
or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they sacrifice not
one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine, for he was
exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca or on the mainland
is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put together. I will
tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of cattle upon the main
land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs,
while his own men and hired strangers feed him twelve widely spreading
herds of goats. Here in Ithaca he runs even large flocks of goats on
the far end of the island, and they are in the charge of excellent goat
herds. Each one of these sends the suitors the best goat in the flock
every day. As for myself, I am in charge of the pigs that you see here,
and I have to keep picking out the best I have and sending it to them."

This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously
without a word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was
satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank,
filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said
as he took it in his hands, "My friend, who was this master of yours
that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell
me? You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he
was, in case I may have met with such a person. Jove and the other gods
know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelled
much."

Eumaeus answered, "Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will
get Ulysses' wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps in
want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a
word of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistress
and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of them,
and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the time as women will
when they have lost their husbands. And you too, old man, for a shirt
and a cloak would doubtless make up a very pretty story. But the wolves
and birds of prey have long since torn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes
of the sea have eaten him, and his bones are lying buried deep in sand
upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone, and a bad business it is
for all his friends--for me especially; go where I may I shall never
find so good a master, not even if I were to go home to my mother and
father where I was bred and born. I do not so much care, however, about
my parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in my own
country; it is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak
of him without reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very
fond of me, and took such care of me that wherever he may be I shall
always honour his memory."

"My friend," replied Ulysses, "you are very positive, and very hard of
belief about your master's coming home again, nevertheless I will not
merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anything
for my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt and
cloak of good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not take
anything at all till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire,
who lets his poverty tempt him into lying. I swear by king Jove, by the
rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now
come, that all will surely happen as I have said it will. Ulysses
will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the
beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those who
are ill treating his wife and son."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Old man, you will neither
get paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink
your wine in peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keep on
reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaks about
my honoured master. As for your oath we will let it alone, but I only
wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father Laertes, and his son
Telemachus. I am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his; he was
running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be no worse man, face
and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has been
unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and get news of
his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is coming
home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a name in
Ithaca. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be taken, or
else to escape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him to protect
him. And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want
to know, who you are and where you come from. Tell me of your town
and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew brought you to
Ithaca, and from what country they professed to come--for you cannot
have come by land."

And Ulysses answered, "I will tell you all about it. If there were meat
and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do
but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily
talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of
the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.

"I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had many
sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had
purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax
(whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour among the
Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put me
on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock. When,
however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided his
estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave a holding
and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marry into a rich
family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the field of
battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw you can see
what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to spare. Mars and
Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my men to surprise the
enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was
the first to leap forward and spear all whom I could overtake. Such was
I in battle, but I did not care about farm work, nor the frugal home
life of those who would bring up children. My delight was in ships,
fighting, javelins, and arrows--things that most men shudder to think
of; but one man likes one thing and another another, and this was what
I was most naturally inclined to. Before the Achaeans went to Troy,
nine times was I in command of men and ships on foreign service, and I
amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoil in the first instance,
and much more was allotted to me later on.

"My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans,
but when Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many
perished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to
Troy, and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doing
so. There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked the
city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us. Then it was
that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but one month happily with my
children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea of making a
descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it. I had nine
ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days I and my men
made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice to the gods
and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set sail
from Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we were going down a
river. Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had no sickness
on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the wind and
steersmen took them. On the fifth day we reached the river Aegyptus;
there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay by them and
keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every
point of vantage.

"But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged
the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and
children captive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they
heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was
filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of armour.
Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the
enemy, for they found themselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many
of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them. Jove,
however, put it in my mind to do thus--and I wish I had died then and
there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for me--I
took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand; then
I went straight up to the king's chariot, clasped his knees and kissed
them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, and took
me weeping to his own home. Many made at me with their ashen spears and
tried to kill me in their fury, but the king protected me, for he feared
the wrath of Jove the protector of strangers, who punishes those who do
evil.

"I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the
Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on
for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who
had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me over
into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house and his possessions
lay. I stayed there for a whole twelve months, but at the end of that
time when months and days had gone by till the same season had come
round again, he set me on board a ship bound for Libya, on a pretence
that I was to take a cargo along with him to that place, but really that
he might sell me as a slave and take the money I fetched. I suspected
his intention, but went on board with him, for I could not help it.

"The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea
that lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled their
destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and could see
nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and the
sea grew dark beneath it. Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts and
the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and brimstone
as the lightning struck it. The men fell all into the sea; they
were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so many
sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting
home again. I was all dismayed. Jove, however, sent the ship's mast
within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, and drifted
before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift but in the darkness
of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotian coast.
There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitably without
charging me anything at all--for his son found me when I was nearly dead
with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand, took me to his
father's house and gave me clothes to wear.

"There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he
had entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his
homeward journey. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought
iron that Ulysses had got together. There was enough to keep his family
for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon.
But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove's
mind from the god's high oak tree, and know whether after so long an
absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in secret. Moreover the
king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as
he did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found,
that should take him to his own country. He sent me off however before
Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing
for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in charge
of her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus.

"These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to the
very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from land
they resolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of the shirt
and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old
clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they reached
the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with a strong rope
fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by the sea
side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn my rags
over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struck out and
swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick wood
in which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my having escaped and
went searching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further
use and went back to their ship. The gods, having hidden me thus easily,
then took me to a good man's door--for it seems that I am not to die yet
awhile."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Poor unhappy stranger, I
have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but that
part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me to believe
it. Why should a man like you go about telling lies in this way? I know
all about the return of my master. The gods one and all of them detest
him, or they would have taken him before Troy, or let him die with
friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then the
Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes and his son would have
been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have spirited him away
we know not whither.

"As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to the
town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news
about Ulysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those who
grieve over the king's absence, and those who rejoice at it because they
can eat up his property without paying for it. For my own part I have
never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I was taken in
by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way till at last
he reached my station, and I was very kind to him. He said he had seen
Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his ships which had
been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses would return in the following
summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring back much wealth.
And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has brought you to my
door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes. It is not
for any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of
respect for Jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying
you."

Ulysses answered, "I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have
given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a
bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your master
comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to
Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will,
set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precipice,
as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies."

"And a pretty figure I should cut then," replied Eumaeus, "both now and
hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and
showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in good earnest
if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will come in
directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper."

Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with
the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a
tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them. But
Eumaeus called to his men and said, "Bring in the best pig you have,
that I may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll of him
ourselves. We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs, while
others reap the fruit of our labour."

On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine
fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did not
forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the first thing
he did was to cut bristles from the pig's face and throw them into the
fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses might return
home again. Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak which he had
kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and stunned it, while the
others slaughtered and singed it. Then they cut it up, and Eumaeus began
by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the fat; these he
sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; they cut the rest
of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roasted them
till they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they
threw them on to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who was a most
equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share. He made seven
portions; one of these he set apart for Mercury the son of Maia and the
nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealt out to the men
man by man. He gave Ulysses some slices cut lengthways down the loin
as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was much pleased. "I hope,
Eumaeus," said he, "that Jove will be as well disposed towards you as I
am, for the respect you are showing to an outcast like myself."

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, "Eat, my good fellow, and
enjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that,
just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses."

As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt
sacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering,
put the cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.
Mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this man
on his own account from among the Taphians during his master's absence,
and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either
to his mistress or Laertes. They then laid their hands upon the good
things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and
drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all went
to bed after having made a hearty supper.

Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. It
poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which is
a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in the
excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak and give
it him, or make one of his men give him one. "Listen to me," said he,
"Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell you
something. It is the wine that makes me talk in this way; wine will make
even a wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and dance
and say many a word that he had better leave unspoken; still, as I have
begun, I will go on. Would that I were still young and strong as when we
got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus and Ulysses were the leaders,
but I was in command also, for the other two would have it so. When we
had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath our armour
and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood that grew
about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the
snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated
thick with rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept
comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders, but I had
carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too
cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and shield. When the
night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted their places, I
nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, and he at once gave me
his ear.

"'Ulysses,' said I, 'this cold will be the death of me, for I have no
cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my shirt,
and I do not know what to do.'

"Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following
plan:

"'Keep still,' said he in a low voice, 'or the others will hear you.'
Then he raised his head on his elbow.

"'My friends,' said he, 'I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep. We
are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tell
Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.'

"On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running
to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough
till morning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in those
days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out
of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier; but now people
look down upon me because my clothes are shabby."

And Eumaeus answered, "Old man, you have told us an excellent story,
and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the
present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else
that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning
you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for we have
not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has only one.
When Ulysses' son comes home again he will give you both cloak and
shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go."

With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some
goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here
Ulysses lay down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak
that he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.

Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the
swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready
to go outside, and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his
property during his master's absence. First he slung his sword over his
brawny shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also
took the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of
attack from men or dogs. Thus equipped he went to his rest where the
pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from
the North wind.


Book XV

MINERVA SUMMONS TELEMACHUS FROM LACEDAEMON--HE MEETS WITH THEOCLYMENUS
AT PYLOS AND BRINGS HIM TO ITHACA--ON LANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OF
EUMAEUS.

But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses' son
that he was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping
in the forecourt of Menelaus's house; Pisistratus was fast asleep,
but Telemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy
father, so Minerva went close up to him and said:

"Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer, nor
leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they
will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a
fool's errand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to
find your excellent mother still there when you get back. Her father and
brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus, who has given her
more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing his wedding
presents. I hope nothing valuable may have been taken from the house in
spite of you, but you know what women are--they always want to do the
best they can for the man who marries them, and never give another
thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their father
either when he is dead and done with. Go home, therefore, and put
everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you
have, until it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own. Let
me tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. The
chief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the Strait
{128} between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean to kill you before you
can reach home. I do not much think they will succeed; it is more likely
that some of those who are now eating up your property will find a grave
themselves. Sail night and day, and keep your ship well away from the
islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will send you a
fair wind. As soon as you get to Ithaca send your ship and men on to the
town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge of your
pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him, therefore, for the
night, and then send him to Penelope to tell her that you have got back
safe from Pylos."

Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus with
his heel to rouse him, and said, "Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke the
horses to the chariot, for we must set off home." {129}

But Pisistratus said, "No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive
in the dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought his
presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good bye to
us in the usual way. So long as he lives a guest should never forget a
host who has shown him kindness."

As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen,
leaving Helen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he
put on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his
shoulders, and went out to meet him. "Menelaus," said he, "let me go
back now to my own country, for I want to get home."

And Menelaus answered, "Telemachus, if you insist on going I will not
detain you. I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or
too rude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a
man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he would
like to stay. One should treat a guest well as long as he is in the
house and speed him when he wants to leave it. Wait, then, till I
can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have
yourself seen them. I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient dinner
for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once more
proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out on
such a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a tour
in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will conduct
you myself through all our principal cities. No one will send us away
empty handed; every one will give us something--a bronze tripod, a
couple of mules, or a gold cup."

"Menelaus," replied Telemachus, "I want to go home at once, for when
I came away I left my property without protection, and fear that
while looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that
something valuable has been stolen during my absence."

When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to
prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. At
this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got
up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he
at once did. Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room, {130}
not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes. When he reached the
place where the treasures of his house were kept, he selected a double
cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a silver mixing bowl.
Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses
which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was largest
and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered like a star,
and lay at the very bottom of the chest. {131} Then they all came back
through the house again till they got to Telemachus, and Menelaus said,
"Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring you safely home
according to your desire. I will now present you with the finest and
most precious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing bowl of
pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold, and it is the
work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidonians made me a present of it
in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was on my return home.
I should like to give it to you."

With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus,
while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before
him. Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.

"I too, my son," said she, "have something for you as a keepsake from
the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go back
rejoicing to your own country and to your home."

So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. Then
Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as
he did so. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the
house, and they both of them sat down to table. A maid servant brought
them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin
for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside them;
an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of
what there was in the house. Eteoneus carved the meat and gave them each
their portions, while Megapenthes poured out the wine. Then they laid
their hands upon the good things that were before them, but as soon as
they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus and Pisistratus yoked
the horses, and took their places in the chariot. They drove out through
the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court,
and Menelaus came after them with a golden goblet of wine in his right
hand that they might make a drink-offering before they set out. He stood
in front of the horses and pledged them, saying, "Farewell to both of
you; see that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as
kind to me as any father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before
Troy."

"We will be sure, sir," answered Telemachus, "to tell him everything as
soon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses returned
when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very great
kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents I am
taking with me."

As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand--an eagle with a
great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm
yard--and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. It
came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front
of the horses. When they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took
comfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, "Tell me, Menelaus, has
heaven sent this omen for us or for you?"

Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to
make, but Helen was too quick for him and said, "I will read this matter
as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it will come
to pass. The eagle came from the mountain where it was bred and has
its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelled far and
suffered much, will return to take his revenge--if indeed he is not back
already and hatching mischief for the suitors."

"May Jove so grant it," replied Telemachus, "if it should prove to be
so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when I am at
home."

As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed
through the town towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon
their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and
darkness was over all the land. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles
lived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus. There they passed
the night and were treated hospitably. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their
places in the chariot. They drove out through the inner gateway and
under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratus lashed
his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came to
Pylos, and then Telemachus said:

"Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you.
You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both
of an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely;
do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if I go
to your father's house he will try to keep me in the warmth of his good
will towards me, and I must go home at once."

Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end he
deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus's
beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. Then
he said, "Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before
I can reach home to tell my father. I know how obstinate he is, and am
sure he will not let you go; he will come down here to fetch you, and he
will not go back without you. But he will be very angry."

With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians and
soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together and gave
his orders. "Now, my men," said he, "get everything in order on board
the ship, and let us set out home."

Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But as
Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva
in the ship's stern, there came to him a man from a distant country,
a seer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He was
descended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep;
he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into exile by the
great and powerful king Neleus. Neleus seized his goods and held them
for a whole year, during which he was a close prisoner in the house
of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account of the
daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a great sorrow that
dread Erinys had laid upon him. In the end, however, he escaped with his
life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged the wrong that had
been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to his brother. Then he
left the country and went to Argos, where it was ordained that he should
reign over much people. There he married, established himself, and had
two famous sons Antiphates and Mantius. Antiphates became father of
Oicleus, and Oicleus of Amphiaraus, who was dearly loved both by Jove
and by Apollo, but he did not live to old age, for he was killed
in Thebes by reason of a woman's gifts. His sons were Alcmaeon
and Amphilochus. Mantius, the other son of Melampus, was father to
Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned in gold, carried off Cleitus
for his beauty's sake, that he might dwell among the immortals, but
Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now that
Amphiaraus was dead. He quarrelled with his father and went to live in
Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied for all men.

His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he was
making drink-offerings and praying in his ship. "Friend," said he,
"now that I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by your
sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pray you
also by your own head and by those of your followers tell me the truth
and nothing but the truth. Who and whence are you? Tell me also of your
town and parents."

Telemachus said, "I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca, and
my father is Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he has come
to some miserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crew
together to see if I can hear any news of him, for he has been away a
long time."

"I too," answered Theoclymenus, "am an exile, for I have killed a man
of my own race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and they
have great power among the Argives. I am flying to escape death at their
hands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the earth. I
am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that they may
not kill me, for I know they are in pursuit."

"I will not refuse you," replied Telemachus, "if you wish to join us.
Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably according to
what we have."

On this he received Theoclymenus' spear and laid it down on the deck of
the ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus
sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told them to
catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They set the
mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fast with
the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets of twisted
ox hide. Minerva sent them a fair wind that blew fresh and strong to
take the ship on her course as fast as possible. Thus then they passed
by Crouni and Chalcis.

Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vessel
made a quick passage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans
rule. Telemachus then headed her for the flying islands, {132} wondering
within himself whether he should escape death or should be taken
prisoner.

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the hut,
and the men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat and drink,
Ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he would
continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the station or
pack him off to the city; so he said:

"Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin begging
about the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men. Give
me your advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with me
and show me the way. I will go the round of the city begging as I needs
must, to see if any one will give me a drink and a piece of bread. I
should like also to go to the house of Ulysses and bring news of her
husband to Queen Penelope. I could then go about among the suitors and
see if out of all their abundance they will give me a dinner. I should
soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways. Listen and
believe when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who gives grace
and good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who would
make a more handy servant than I should--to put fresh wood on the fire,
chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that
poor men have to do for their betters."

The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. "Heaven help
me," he exclaimed, "what ever can have put such a notion as that into
your head? If you go near the suitors you will be undone to a certainty,
for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. They would never
think of taking a man like you for a servant. Their servants are all
young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and shirts, with well
looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables are kept quite
clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine. Stay where you are,
then; you are not in anybody's way; I do not mind your being here, no
more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comes home he will give
you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you want to go."

Ulysses answered, "I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to
me, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble; there
is nothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men have
once got low down in the world they will go through a great deal on
behalf of their miserable bellies. Since, however, you press me to stay
here and await the return of Telemachus, tell me about Ulysses' mother,
and his father whom he left on the threshold of old age when he set
out for Troy. Are they still living or are they already dead and in the
house of Hades?"

"I will tell you all about them," replied Eumaeus, "Laertes is still
living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house,
for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also
about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him more
than anything else did. She came to an unhappy end {133} through sorrow
for her son: may no friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by me come
to such an end as she did. As long as she was still living, though she
was always grieving, I used to like seeing her and asking her how she
did, for she brought me up along with her daughter Ctimene, the youngest
of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she made little
difference between us. When, however, we both grew up, they sent Ctimene
to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As for me, my mistress
gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals for my feet, and
sent me off into the country, but she was just as fond of me as ever.
This is all over now. Still it has pleased heaven to prosper my work in
the situation which I now hold. I have enough to eat and drink, and can
find something for any respectable stranger who comes here; but there
is no getting a kind word or deed out of my mistress, for the house has
fallen into the hands of wicked people. Servants want sometimes to see
their mistress and have a talk with her; they like to have something
to eat and drink at the house, and something too to take back with them
into the country. This is what will keep servants in a good humour."

Ulysses answered, "Then you must have been a very little fellow,
Eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents.
Tell me, and tell me true, was the city in which your father and mother
lived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you
were alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for
whatever your master gave them?"

"Stranger," replied Eumaeus, "as regards your question: sit still, make
yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The nights
are now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and
sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time,
too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes
to go to bed let him leave us and do so; he can then take my master's
pigs out when he has done breakfast in the morning. We too will sit here
eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another stories about
our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered much, and been buffeted
about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling the memory of sorrows
that have long gone by. As regards your question, then, my tale is as
follows:

"You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over above
Ortygia, {134} where the land begins to turn round and look in another
direction. {135} It is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good,
with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine
and wheat. Dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any
sickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills them
with his painless shafts. It contains two communities, and the whole
country is divided between these two. My father Ctesius son of Ormenus,
a man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.

"Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (for
the Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freighted
with gewgaws of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician woman in
my father's house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant; these
scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near their ship,
seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman can resist, no matter
how good she may be by nature. The man who had seduced her asked her who
she was and where she came from, and on this she told him her father's
name. 'I come from Sidon,' said she, 'and am daughter to Arybas, a
man rolling in wealth. One day as I was coming into the town from the
country, some Taphian pirates seized me and took me here over the sea,
where they sold me to the man who owns this house, and he gave them
their price for me.'

"The man who had seduced her then said, 'Would you like to come along
with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?
They are both alive and are said to be well off.'

"'I will do so gladly,' answered she, 'if you men will first swear me a
solemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.'

"They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their oath
the woman said, 'Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the street or
at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one should go and
tell my master, in which case he would suspect something. He would put
me in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep your own counsel
therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can, and send me word
when you have done loading. I will bring as much gold as I can lay my
hands on, and there is something else also that I can do towards paying
my fare. I am nurse to the son of the good man of the house, a funny
little fellow just able to run about. I will carry him off in your ship,
and you will get a great deal of money for him if you take him and sell
him in foreign parts.'

"On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a whole
year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise,
and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the
woman. Their messenger, a very cunning fellow, came to my father's house
bringing a necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; and
while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it and
bargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the woman and then went
back to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led me out of the
house. In the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with
the cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in
attendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the public
assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the
bosom of her dress, while I followed her, for I knew no better. The sun
was now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on as
fast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the Phoenician ship
was lying. When they had got on board they sailed their ways over the
sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fair wind; six days did
we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Diana struck the
woman and she fell heavily down into the ship's hold as though she were
a sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the
seals and fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone. Presently the
winds and waves took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of
his chattels for me, and thus it was that ever I came to set eyes upon
this country."

Ulysses answered, "Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortunes
with the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good as
well as evil, for in spite of everything you have a good master, who
sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead a good
life, whereas I am still going about begging my way from city to city."

Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left for
sleep, for it was soon daybreak. In the mean time Telemachus and his
crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast,
and rowed the ship into the harbour. {136} They cast out their mooring
stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the sea shore,
mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they had had enough
to eat and drink Telemachus said, "Take the ship on to the town, but
leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of my farms.
In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down to the
city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will give you
all a good dinner with meat and wine." {137}

Then Theoclymenus said, "And what, my dear young friend, is to become of
me? To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? or shall I
go straight to your own house and to your mother?"

"At any other time," replied Telemachus, "I should have bidden you go to
my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at the present
moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for I shall be
away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show herself
even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper chamber,
out of their way; but I can tell you a man whose house you can go
to--I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is held in the highest
estimation by every one in Ithaca. He is much the best man and the most
persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and
trying to take Ulysses' place. Jove, however, in heaven alone knows
whether or no they will come to a bad end before the marriage takes
place."

As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand--a hawk, Apollo's
messenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore
them off, {138} fell to the ground midway between Telemachus and the
ship. On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.
"Telemachus," said he, "that bird did not fly on your right hand without
having been sent there by some god. As soon as I saw it I knew it was an
omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there will be no
house in Ithaca more royal than your own."

"I wish it may prove so," answered Telemachus. "If it does, I will show
you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet
you will congratulate you."

Then he said to his friend Piraeus, "Piraeus, son of Clytius, you have
throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those who
have accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger to
your own house and entertain him hospitably till I can come for him."

And Piraeus answered, "Telemachus, you may stay away as long as you
please, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack of
hospitality."

As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose
the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachus
bound on his sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head
of sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship. Then they loosed the
hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city
as they had been told to do, while Telemachus strode on as fast as he
could, till he reached the homestead where his countless herds of
swine were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was so
devoted a servant to his master.


Book XVI

ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.

Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were
were getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out
with the pigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but fawned
upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the
dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus:

"Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of
your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and
not barking."

The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the door.
Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing wine
fell from his hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed his head
and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could not be
more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old age,
after ten years' absence in a foreign country and after having gone
through much hardship. He embraced him, kissed him all over as though he
had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying:

"So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When I
heard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you any
more. Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look
at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into
the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town
generally. I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the
suitors are doing."

"So be it, old friend," answered Telemachus, "but I am come now because
I want to see you, and to