e and well, and to take his revenge in his
own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him."

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "do not exult too confidently over all
this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses come
home--more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both
of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is
angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end
of them; for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor
poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end in consequence
of their iniquity; Ulysses is dead far away from the Achaean land; he
will never return home again."

Then nurse Euryclea said, "My child, what are you talking about? but you
were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband is
never coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side
at this very moment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I was
washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him, and I
wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not let me, and
clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I will make this
bargain with you--if I am deceiving you, you may have me killed by the
most cruel death you can think of."

"My dear nurse," said Penelope, "however wise you may be you can hardly
fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in search of
my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has
killed them."

On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she
considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband and
question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace
him. When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister, she
sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right angles
{180} [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near one of
the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see what his
brave wife would say to him when she saw him. For a long time she sat
silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she looked him full
in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his shabby
clothes and failed to recognise him, {181} till Telemachus began to
reproach her and said:

"Mother--but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name--why
do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sit by his
side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No other woman
could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her
after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much;
but your heart always was as hard as a stone."

Penelope answered, "My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can find
no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. I cannot
even look him straight in the face. Still, if he really is Ulysses
come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one another
better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are alone
acquainted, and which are hidden from all others."

Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, "Let your mother put me
to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else,
because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us,
however, consider what we had better do next. When one man has killed
another--even though he was not one who would leave many friends to take
up his quarrel--the man who has killed him must still say good bye to
his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay
of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca. I would have you
consider this matter."

"Look to it yourself, father," answered Telemachus, "for they say you
are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other
mortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right good
will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds
out."

"I will say what I think will be best," answered Ulysses. "First wash
and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and
dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so that if
people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going along
the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a wedding in
the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors will get about
in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my own land. Once
there, we will settle which of the courses heaven vouchsafes us shall
seem wisest."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed
and put their shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took
his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance. The
house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people
outside said, "I suppose the queen has been getting married at last.
She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her
husband's property until he comes home." {182}

This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had been
happening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses in his
own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him look
taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick on
the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she
glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a skilful workman who
has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva--and his work is
full of beauty--enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it. He came
from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat down opposite
his wife on the seat he had left. "My dear," said he, "heaven has
endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman ever yet had. No
other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come
back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through
so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will sleep alone,
for this woman has a heart as hard as iron."

"My dear," answered Penelope, "I have no wish to set myself up, nor to
depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very well
remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he
himself built. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it
with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets."

She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, "Wife,
I am much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been
taking my bed from the place in which I left it? He must have found it a
hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god came
and helped him to shift it. There is no man living, however strong and
in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a marvellous
curiosity which I made with my very own hands. There was a young olive
growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour, and about as
thick as a bearing-post. I built my room round this with strong walls
of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doors strong and
well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive tree and left
the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the root upwards and
then worked with carpenter's tools well and skilfully, straightening
my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a bed-prop.
I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it the centre-post of my
bed, at which I worked till I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and
silver; after this I stretched a hide of crimson leather from one side
of it to the other. So you see I know all about it, and I desire to
learn whether it is still there, or whether any one has been removing it
by cutting down the olive tree at its roots."

When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke
down. She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and
kissed him. "Do not be angry with me Ulysses," she cried, "you, who are
the wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied
us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together; do
not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace you thus
as soon as I saw you. I have been shuddering all the time through fear
that someone might come here and deceive me with a lying story; for
there are many very wicked people going about. Jove's daughter Helen
would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign country, if she
had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her and bring her
back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no thought
to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows. Now, however,
that you have convinced me by showing that you know all about our
bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single
maidservant, the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on my
marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though I
have been I can mistrust no longer."

Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and
faithful wife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men who
are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship with
the fury of his winds and waves; a few alone reach the land, and these,
covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on firm
ground and out of danger--even so was her husband welcome to her as she
looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from about
his neck. Indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow till
rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined otherwise, and
held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn to
leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bear
her onward to break the day upon mankind.

At last, however, Ulysses said, "Wife, we have not yet reached the end
of our troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. It
is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the shade
of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I went down into
Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions. But now let us
go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep."

"You shall go to bed as soon as you please," replied Penelope, "now that
the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your country.
But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me about the
task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about it later, so it is
better that I should be told at once."

"My dear," answered Ulysses, "why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I do
not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide, carrying
an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never heard of
the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food. They know nothing
about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship. He gave me this
certain token which I will not hide from you. He said that a wayfarer
should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovel that I had
on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground and sacrifice
a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was to go home and
offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other. As for
myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my
life should ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of
mind, and my people should bless me. All this, he said, should surely
come to pass."

And Penelope said, "If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier
time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from
misfortune."

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches
and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid
them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the
bed chamber woman Eurynome {183} to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by
torch light. When she had conducted them to their room she went
back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and made
the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep in the
cloisters.

When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking
with one another. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing
the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many
sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble
he had himself given to other people. He told her everything, and she
was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he had
ended his whole story.

He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached the
fertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops
and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave
comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and
furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, for to
his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how he went on
to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed all his
ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only. Then he told
of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the chill house of
Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias, and how he
saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who bore him and brought
him up when he was a child; how he then heard the wondrous singing of
the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and terrible Charybdis
and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety; how his men
then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove therefore struck the
ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together,
himself alone being left alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian
island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there in a cave, and fed
him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she intended making him
immortal so that he should never grow old, but she could not persuade
him to let her do so; and how after much suffering he had found his way
to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though he had been a god, and
sent him back in a ship to his own country after having given him gold,
bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was the last thing about
which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased
the burden of his sorrows.

Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that
Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned
Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On
this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope,
"Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in
lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home though
I was longing all the time to do so. Now, however, that we have at last
come together, take care of the property that is in the house. As for
the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take
many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to
make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am now
going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has
so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these
instructions, though you have little need of them. At sunrise it will
at once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go upstairs,
therefore, {184} and stay there with your women. See nobody and ask no
questions." {185}

As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus,
Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.
This they did, and armed themselves. When they had done so, they
opened the gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now
daylight, but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led
them quickly out of the town.


Book XXIV

THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES--ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE
OF LAERTES--THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVA
CONCLUDES A PEACE.

Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his
hand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men's eyes in
sleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts
and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. As
bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them
has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the ghosts
whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow led them down into the
dark abode of death. When they had passed the waters of Oceanus and the
rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the land of dreams,
whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell the souls and
shadows of them that can labour no more.

Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of
Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man
of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself.

They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of
Agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered also
the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus;
and the ghost of Achilles spoke first.

"Son of Atreus," it said, "we used to say that Jove had loved you better
from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain over many
and brave men, when we were all fighting together before Troy; yet the
hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid upon you all too
early. Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-day of your
renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound over your ashes, and
your son would have been heir to your good name, whereas it has now been
your lot to come to a most miserable end."

"Happy son of Peleus," answered the ghost of Agamemnon, "for having
died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and the
Achaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay in the
whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your
chivalry. We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever
have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us. Then, when we
had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed and
cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments. The Danaans
tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you. Your mother, when she
heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and the sound
of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that the Achaeans
quaked for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to their ships had
not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked them saying,
'Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is his mother coming
from the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body of her son.'

"Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of the
old man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you
in immortal raiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet
voices in lament--calling and answering one another; there was not an
Argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nights
seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the
eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep with many
an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you. You were burnt in raiment of
the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes, horse and foot,
clashed their armour round the pile as you were burning, with the tramp
as of a great multitude. But when the flames of heaven had done
their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and laid them in
ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us a golden vase to hold
them--gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself; in this we mingled
your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who had gone before you, and
separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, who had been closer to
you than any other of your comrades now that Patroclus was no more.

"Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point
jutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far
out upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be born
hereafter. Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them
to be contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans. You must have
been present at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men gird
themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some
great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis
offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thus even in death
your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore
among all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days of my
fighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by the
hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife."

Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the
ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts of
Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up
to them at once. The ghost of Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son of
Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began to talk
to him.

"Amphimedon," it said, "what has happened to all you fine young men--all
of an age too--that you are come down here under the ground? One could
pick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raise his winds and
waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end
of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing,
or while fighting in defence of their wives and city? Answer my
question, for I have been your guest. Do you not remember how I came to
your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us with his ships
against Troy? It was a whole month ere we could resume our voyage, for
we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us."

And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, "Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king of
men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you fully
and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about. Ulysses
had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not say point
blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, for she
meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the trick she played
us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room and began to work on an
enormous piece of fine needlework. 'Sweethearts,' said she, 'Ulysses
is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately;
wait--for I would not have my skill in needlework perish
unrecorded--till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, against
the time when death shall take him. He is very rich, and the women of
the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.' This is what she
said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon her great
web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again
by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years without our
finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year,
in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one of her
maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act
of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no;
and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had it
washed, {186} its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.

"Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where his
swineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from
a voyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched
their plot for our destruction. Telemachus came first, and then after
him, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and
leaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar. He came
so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among
us, and we reviled him and threw things at him. He endured both being
struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his own house; but
when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and Telemachus
took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors behind
them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a quantity
of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this was the
beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the bow--nor nearly
do so. When it was about to reach the hands of Ulysses, we all of us
shouted out that it should not be given him, no matter what he might
say, but Telemachus insisted on his having it. When he had got it in his
hands he strung it with ease and sent his arrow through the iron. Then
he stood on the floor of the cloister and poured his arrows on the
ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killed Antinous, and then,
aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly darts and they fell
thick on one another. It was plain that some one of the gods was
helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main throughout the
cloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning as our brains
were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our blood. This,
Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are lying still
uncared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends at home do not
yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out and wash
the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according to the
offices due to the departed."

"Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes," replied the ghost of Agamemnon, "you
are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare
excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as
Penelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue
shall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall be
welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope. How far
otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killed her
lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has brought
disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones."

Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowels
of the earth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the town
and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which he
had reclaimed with infinite labour. Here was his house, with a lean-to
running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept and sat
and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel woman, who looked
after him in this his country-farm. When Ulysses got there, he said to
his son and to the other two:

"Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to
recognise me after so long an absence."

He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who
went straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to
make trial of his father. As he went down into the great orchard, he did
not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for they
were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the place
where the old man had told them; he therefore found his father alone,
hoeing a vine. He had on a dirty old shirt, patched and very shabby;
his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him from the
brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he had a goat skin cap on
his head, and was looking very woe-begone. When Ulysses saw him so worn,
so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tall pear tree and
began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, and tell him
all about his having come home, or whether he should first question him
and see what he would say. In the end he deemed it best to be crafty
with him, so in this mind he went up to his father, who was bending down
and digging about a plant.

"I see, sir," said Ulysses, "that you are an excellent gardener--what
pains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a single plant, not a
fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of your
attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I say
that you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You are old,
unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idle that
your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and figure
have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble birth.
I should have said that you were one of those who should wash well, eat
well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do; but tell me,
and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whose garden are you
working? Tell me also about another matter. Is this place that I have
come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said so, but he was a
dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story out when I was
asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he was still living, or
was already dead and in the house of Hades. Believe me when I tell you
that this man came to my house once when I was in my own country and
never yet did any stranger come to me whom I liked better. He said that
his family came from Ithaca and that his father was Laertes, son of
Arceisius. I received him hospitably, making him welcome to all the
abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave him all customary
presents. I gave him seven talents of fine gold, and a cup of solid
silver with flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelve light cloaks,
and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks of single
fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts.
To all this I added four good looking women skilled in all useful arts,
and I let him take his choice."

His father shed tears and answered, "Sir, you have indeed come to the
country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked
people. All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. If
you could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have
entertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amply
when you left him--as would have been only right considering what you
had already given him. But tell me, and tell me true, how many years is
it since you entertained this guest--my unhappy son, as ever was? Alas!
He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea have
eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of some
continent. Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents,
could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could
his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband as was
natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the offices
due to the departed. But now, tell me truly for I want to know. Who
and whence are you--tell me of your town and parents? Where is the
ship lying that has brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or were you a
passenger on some other man's ship, and those who brought you here have
gone on their way and left you?"

"I will tell you everything," answered Ulysses, "quite truly. I come
from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, who
is the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off my
course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here against
my will. As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open country
outside the town, and this is the fifth year since Ulysses left my
country. Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when he left me.
The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and I rejoiced to
see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have another
friendly meeting and exchange presents."

A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled both
hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey
head, groaning heavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched,
and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang
towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, "I am he,
father, about whom you are asking--I have returned after having been
away for twenty years. But cease your sighing and lamentation--we have
no time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing the
suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes."

"If you really are my son Ulysses," replied Laertes, "and have come back
again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity as shall
convince me."

"First observe this scar," answered Ulysses, "which I got from a boar's
tusk when I was hunting on Mt. Parnassus. You and my mother had sent me
to Autolycus, my mother's father, to receive the presents which when he
was over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I will point out
to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all
about them as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all,
and you told me their names and what they all were. You gave me thirteen
pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also said you
would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted between each
row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of heaven has
been laid heavy upon them."

Laertes' strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which
his son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to
support him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he
came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, "O father
Jove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have
really been punished for their insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I
am much afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up here
directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the
cities of the Cephallenians."

Ulysses answered, "Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that,
but let us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told
Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready
as soon as possible."

Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they got
there they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting
up meat and mixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman took
Laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil. She put him on
a good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a more imposing
presence, making him taller and stouter than before. When he came back
his son was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said
to him, "My dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much
taller and better-looking."

Laertes answered, "Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that
I were the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took
Nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what I
then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, I should
have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors. I
should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoiced to
see it."

Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their
work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his proper
place on the benches and seats. Then they began eating; by and by old
Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their mother, the
Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he was growing old, had
been to fetch them. When they saw Ulysses and were certain it was he,
they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulysses scolded them good
naturedly and said, "Sit down to your dinner, old man, and never mind
about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin for some time and
have been waiting for you."

Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. "Sir," said
he, seizing his master's hand and kissing it at the wrist, "we have long
been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after we
had given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper you.
{187} But tell me, does Penelope already know of your return, or shall
we send some one to tell her?"

"Old man," answered Ulysses, "she knows already, so you need not trouble
about that." On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius gathered
round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after the other;
then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their father.

While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round
the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the
suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered
from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses.
They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies
of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the
fishermen to take each of them to his own place. They then met angrily
in the place of assembly, and when they were got together Eupeithes
rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son
Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said,
weeping bitterly, "My friends, this man has done the Achaeans great
wrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he
has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been
killing all the foremost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up and
doing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule,
or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards. It will be an
everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons
and brothers. For my own part I should have no more pleasure in life,
but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then, and after them, before
they can cross over to the main land."

He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard
Phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses.
Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle of
the assembly, and Medon said, "Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses did not
do these things against the will of heaven. I myself saw an immortal god
take the form of Mentor and stand beside him. This god appeared, now in
front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously about the court
and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on one another."

On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor,
rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past and
future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying,

"Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as
they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we
bade you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the
wantonness of their hearts--wasting the substance and dishonouring the
wife of a chieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however, let
it be as I say, and do as I tell you. Do not go out against Ulysses, or
you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your own heads."

This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at
once left the assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for the
speech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes;
they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed
themselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes led
them on in their folly. He thought he was going to avenge the murder
of his son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was himself to
perish in his attempt.

Then Minerva said to Jove, "Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, answer
me this question--What do you propose to do? Will you set them fighting
still further, or will you make peace between them?"

And Jove answered, "My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by your
own arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the
suitors? Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will
be most reasonable arrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them
swear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue to
rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of
their sons and brothers. Let them then all become friends as heretofore,
and let peace and plenty reign."

This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she
darted from off the topmost summits of Olympus.

Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by
saying, "Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up
to us." So one of Dolius's sons went as he was bid. Standing on the
threshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, "Here
they are, let us put on our armour at once."

They put on their armour as fast as they could--that is to say Ulysses,
his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius did
the same--warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When they
had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth,
Ulysses leading the way.

Then Jove's daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form
and voice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to
his son Telemachus, "Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an
engagement, which will show every man's mettle, be sure not to disgrace
your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the
world over."

"You say truly, my dear father," answered Telemachus, "and you shall
see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family."

Laertes was delighted when he heard this. "Good heavens," he exclaimed,
"what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My son and
grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour."

On this Minerva came close up to him and said, "Son of Arceisius---best
friend I have in the world--pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Jove
her father; then poise your spear and hurl it."

As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed
to her he poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes' helmet, and
the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and
his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Meantime Ulysses and his son fell upon the front line of the foe and
smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed
every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again,
only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause. "Men of
Ithaca," she cried, "cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at
once without further bloodshed."

On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their
arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of
the goddess' voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. But
Ulysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down
like a soaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire
that fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, "Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angry
with you."

Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed
the form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace
between the two contending parties.



                        FOOTNOTES

{1} Black races are evidently known to the writer as stretching all
across Africa, one half looking West on to the Atlantic, and the other
East on to the Indian Ocean.

{2} The original use of the footstool was probably less to rest the feet
than to keep them (especially when bare) from a floor which was often
wet and dirty.

{3} The [Greek] or seat, is occasionally called "high," as being higher
than the [Greek] or low footstool. It was probably no higher than an
ordinary chair is now, and seems to have had no back.

{4} Temesa was on the West Coast of the toe of Italy, in what is now the
gulf of Sta Eufemia. It was famous in remote times for its copper mines,
which, however, were worked out when Strabo wrote.

{5} i.e. "with a current in it"--see illustrations and map near the end
of bks. v. and vi. respectively.

{6} Reading [Greek] for [Greek], cf. "Od." iii. 81 where the same
mistake is made, and xiii. 351 where the mountain is called Neritum, the
same place being intended both here and in book xiii.

{7} It is never plausibly explained why Penelope cannot do this, and
from bk. ii. it is clear that she kept on deliberately encouraging the
suitors, though we are asked to believe that she was only fooling them.

{8} See note on "Od." i. 365.

{9} Middle Argos means the Peleponnese which, however, is never so
called in the "Iliad". I presume "middle" means "middle between the two
Greek-speaking countries of Asia Minor and Sicily, with South Italy";
for that parts of Sicily and also large parts, though not the whole of
South Italy, were inhabited by Greek-speaking races centuries before the
Dorian colonisations can hardly be doubted. The Sicians, and also the
Sicels, both of them probably spoke Greek.

{10} cf. "Il." vi. 490-495. In the "Iliad" it is "war," not "speech,"
that is a man's matter. It argues a certain hardness, or at any rate
dislike of the "Iliad" on the part of the writer of the "Odyssey,"
that she should have adopted Hector's farewell to Andromache here, as
elsewhere in the poem, for a scene of such inferior pathos.

{11} [Greek] The whole open court with the covered cloister running
round it was called [Greek], or [Greek], but the covered part was
distinguished by being called "shady" or "shadow-giving". It was in this
part that the tables for the suitors were laid. The Fountain Court at
Hampton Court may serve as an illustration (save as regards the use of
arches instead of wooden supports and rafters) and the arrangement
is still common in Sicily. The usual translation "shadowy" or "dusky"
halls, gives a false idea of the scene.

{12} The reader will note the extreme care which the writer takes to
make it clear that none of the suitors were allowed to sleep in Ulysses'
house.

{13} See Appendix; g, in plan of Ulysses' house.

{14} I imagine this passage to be a rejoinder to "Il." xxiii. 702-705 in
which a tripod is valued at twelve oxen, and a good useful maid of
all work at only four. The scrupulous regard of Laertes for his wife's
feelings is of a piece with the extreme jealousy for the honour of
woman, which is manifest throughout the "Odyssey".

{15} [Greek] "The [Greek], or tunica, was a shirt or shift, and served
as the chief under garment of the Greeks and Romans, whether men
or women." Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, under
"Tunica".

{16} Doors fastened to all intents and purposes as here described may be
seen in the older houses at Trapani. There is a slot on the outer side
of the door by means of which a person who has left the room can shoot
the bolt. My bedroom at the Albergo Centrale was fastened in this way.

{17} [Greek] So we vulgarly say "had cooked his goose," or "had settled
his hash." Aegyptus cannot of course know of the fate Antiphus had met
with, for there had as yet been no news of or from Ulysses.

{18} "Il." xxii. 416. [Greek] The authoress has bungled by borrowing
these words verbatim from the "Iliad", without prefixing the necessary
"do not," which I have supplied.

{19} i.e. you have money, and could pay when I got judgment, whereas the
suitors are men of straw.

{20} cf. "Il." ii. 76. [Greek]. The Odyssean passage runs [Greek]. Is
it possible not to suspect that the name Mentor was coined upon that of
Nestor?

{21} i.e. in the outer court, and in the uncovered part of the inner
house.

{22} This would be fair from Sicily, which was doing duty for Ithaca in
the mind of the writer, but a North wind would have been preferable for
a voyage from the real Ithaca to Pylos.

{23} [Greek] The wind does not whistle over waves. It only whistles
through rigging or some other obstacle that cuts it.

{24} cf. "Il." v.20. [Greek] The Odyssean line is [Greek]. There can
be no doubt that the Odyssean line was suggested by the Iliadic, but
nothing can explain why Idaeus jumping from his chariot should suggest
to the writer of the "Odyssey" the sun jumping from the sea. The
probability is that she never gave the matter a thought, but took the
line in question as an effect of saturation with the "Iliad," and of
unconscious cerebration. The "Odyssey" contains many such examples.

{25} The heart, liver, lights, kidneys, etc. were taken out from the
inside and eaten first as being more readily cooked; the [Greek], or
bone meat, was cooking while the [Greek] or inward parts were being
eaten. I imagine that the thigh bones made a kind of gridiron, while at
the same time the marrow inside them got cooked.

{26} i.e. skewers, either single, double, or even five pronged. The meat
would be pierced with the skewer, and laid over the ashes to grill--the
two ends of the skewer being supported in whatever way convenient. Meat
so cooking may be seen in any eating house in Smyrna, or any Eastern
town. When I rode across the Troad from the Dardanelles to Hissarlik and
Mount Ida, I noticed that my dragoman and his men did all our outdoor
cooking exactly in the Odyssean and Iliadic fashion.

{27} cf. "Il." xvii. 567. [Greek] The Odyssean lines are--[Greek]

{28} Reading [Greek] for [Greek], cf. "Od." i.186.

{29} The geography of the Aegean as above described is correct, but is
probably taken from the lost poem, the Nosti, the existence of which is
referred to "Od." i.326,327 and 350, etc. A glance at the map will show
that heaven advised its supplicants quite correctly.

{30} The writer--ever jealous for the honour of women--extenuates
Clytemnestra's guilt as far as possible, and explains it as due to her
having been left unprotected, and fallen into the hands of a wicked man.

{31} The Greek is [Greek] cf. "Iliad" ii. 408 [Greek] Surely the [Greek]
of the Odyssean passage was due to the [Greek] of the "Iliad." No other
reason suggests itself for the making Menelaus return on the very day of
the feast given by Orestes. The fact that in the "Iliad" Menelaus came
to a banquet without waiting for an invitation, determines the writer
of the "Odyssey" to make him come to a banquet, also uninvited, but
as circumstances did not permit of his having been invited, his coming
uninvited is shown to have been due to chance. I do not think the
authoress thought all this out, but attribute the strangeness of the
coincidence to unconscious cerebration and saturation.

{32} cf. "Il." i.458, ii. 421. The writer here interrupts an Iliadic
passage (to which she returns immediately) for the double purpose of
dwelling upon the slaughter of the heifer, and of letting Nestor's wife
and daughter enjoy it also. A male writer, if he was borrowing from the
"Iliad," would have stuck to his borrowing.

{33} cf. "Il." xxiv. 587,588 where the lines refer to the washing the
dead body of Hector.

{34} See illustration on opposite page. The yard is typical of many that
may be seen in Sicily. The existing ground-plan is probably unmodified
from Odyssean, and indeed long pre-Odyssean times, but the earlier
buildings would have no arches, and would, one would suppose, be mainly
timber. The Odyssean [Greek] were the sheds that ran round the yard
as the arches do now. The [Greek] was the one through which the main
entrance passed, and which was hence "noisy," or reverberating. It had
an upper story in which visitors were often lodged.

{35} This journey is an impossible one. Telemachus and Pisistratus would
have been obliged to drive over the Taygetus range, over which there has
never yet been a road for wheeled vehicles. It is plain therefore that
the audience for whom the "Odyssey" was written was one that would be
unlikely to know anything about the topography of the Peloponnese, so
that the writer might take what liberties she chose.

{36} The lines which I have enclosed in brackets are evidently an
afterthought--added probably by the writer herself--for they evince
the same instinctively greater interest in anything that may concern a
woman, which is so noticeable throughout the poem. There is no further
sign of any special festivities nor of any other guests than Telemachus
and Pisistratus, until lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed in brackets)
are abruptly introduced, probably with a view of trying to carry off the
introduction of the lines now in question.

The addition was, I imagine, suggested by a desire to excuse and explain
the non-appearance of Hermione in bk. xv., as also of both Hermione and
Megapenthes in the rest of bk. iv. Megapenthes in bk. xv. seems to be
still a bachelor: the presumption therefore is that bk. xv. was written
before the story of his marriage here given. I take it he is only
married here because his sister is being married. She having been
properly attended to, Megapenthes might as well be married at the same
time. Hermione could not now be less than thirty.

I have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my "Authoress of
the Odyssey", p.136-138. See also p. 256 of the same book.

{37} Sparta and Lacedaemon are here treated as two different places,
though in other parts of the poem it is clear that the writer
understands them as one. The catalogue in the "Iliad," which the writer
is here presumably following, makes the same mistake ("Il." ii. 581,582)

{38} These last three lines are identical with "Il." vxiii. 604-606.

{39} From the Greek [Greek] it is plain that Menelaus took up the piece
of meat with his fingers.

{40} Amber is never mentioned in the "Iliad." Sicily, where I suppose
the "Odyssey" to have been written, has always been, and still is, one
of the principal amber producing countries. It was probably the only one
known in the Odyssean age. See "The Authoress of the Odyssey", p260.

{41} This no doubt refers to the story told in the last poem of the
Cypria about Paris and Helen robbing Menelaus of the greater part of his
treasures, when they sailed together for Troy.

{42} It is inconceivable that Helen should enter thus, in the middle of
supper, intending to work with her distaff, if great festivities were
going on. Telemachus and Pisistratus are evidently dining en famille.

{43} In the Italian insurrection of 1848, eight young men who were being
hotly pursued by the Austrian police hid themselves inside Donatello's
colossal wooden horse in the Salone at Padua, and remained there for
a week being fed by their confederates. In 1898 the last survivor was
carried round Padua in triumph.

{44} The Greek is [Greek]. Is it unfair to argue that the writer is a
person of somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom a strong smell of fish
is distasteful?

{45} The Greek is [Greek]. I believe this to be a hit at the writer's
own countrymen who were of Phocaean descent, and the next following line
to be a rejoinder to complaints made against her in bk. vi. 273-288, to
the effect that she gave herself airs and would marry none of her own
people. For that the writer of the "Odyssey" was the person who has
been introduced into the poem under the name of Nausicaa, I cannot bring
myself to question. I may remind English readers that [Greek] (i.e.
phoca) means "seal." Seals almost always appear on Phocaean coins.

{46} Surely here again we are in the hands of a writer of delicate
sensibility. It is not as though the seals were stale; they had only
just been killed. The writer, however is obviously laughing at her own
countrymen, and insulting them as openly as she dares.

{47} We were told above (lines 357,357) that it was only one day's sail.

{48} I give the usual translation, but I do not believe the Greek will
warrant it. The Greek reads [Greek].

This is usually held to mean that Ithaca is an island fit for breeding
goats, and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it would
have been if it were fit for breeding horses. I find little authority
for such a translation; the most equitable translation of the text as it
stands is, "Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and delectable
rather than fit for breeding horses; for not one of the islands is good
driving ground, nor well meadowed." Surely the writer does not mean that
a pleasant or delectable island would not be fit for breeding horses?
The most equitable translation, therefore, of the present text being
thus halt and impotent, we may suspect corruption, and I hazard the
following emendation, though I have not adopted it in my translation, as
fearing that it would be deemed too fanciful. I would read:--[Greek].

As far as scanning goes the [Greek] is not necessary; [Greek] iv. 72,
[Greek] iv. 233, to go no further afield than earlier lines of the same
book, give sufficient authority for [Greek], but the [Greek] would not
be redundant; it would emphasise the surprise of the contrast, and I
should prefer to have it, though it is not very important either way.
This reading of course should be translated "Ithaca is an island fit for
breeding goats, and (by your leave) itself a horseman rather than
fit for breeding horses--for not one of the islands is good and well
meadowed ground."

This would be sure to baffle the Alexandrian editors. "How," they would
ask themselves, "could an island be a horseman?" and they would cast
about for an emendation. A visit to the top of Mt. Eryx might perhaps
make the meaning intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration of
the text to the reader as readily as it did to myself.

I have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the "Odyssey"
was familiar with the old Sican city at the top of Mt. Eryx, and that
the Aegadean islands which are so striking when seen thence did duty
with her for the Ionian islands--Marettimo, the highest and most
westerly of the group, standing for