you whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this
insatiable tramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently, to
king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him."

Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat's
paunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves
out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he
did so in a golden goblet of wine. "Good luck to you," he said, "father
stranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have
better times by and by."

To this Ulysses answered, "Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good
understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. I
have heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man
both brave and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear to
be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am
saying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon
earth. As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks
that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods
bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs must, and makes the best
of it; for God almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. I know
all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much wrong in the
stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my
brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all things
always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without
vain glory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see how
they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of one who
is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence. Nay, he
will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that you may
not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once he is here the
suitors and he will not part bloodlessly."

With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put
the gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away serious
and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he did not
escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand of
Telemachus. So he took his seat again at the place from which he had
come.

Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the
suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win
still further honour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mocking
laugh and said, "Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to
show myself to the suitors although I detest them. I should like also to
give my son a hint that he had better not have anything more to do with
them. They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief."

"My dear child," answered Eurynome, "all that you have said is true,
go and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your
face. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is not
right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom you
always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is already grown
up."

"I know, Eurynome," replied Penelope, "that you mean well, but do not
try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed
me of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell
Autonoe and Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when I
am in the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not be
proper for me to do so."

On this the old woman {150} went out of the room to bid the maids go to
their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another matter,
and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on her couch
and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed grace and
beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. She washed
her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she goes
dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of a more commanding
figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn ivory. When
Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids came in from
the women's room and woke Penelope with the sound of their talking.

"What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having," said she, as
she passed her hands over her face, "in spite of all my misery. I wish
Diana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I
might no longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who
possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man
among the Achaeans."

With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but
attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,
holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on either
side of her. As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and
became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he might
win her for his own bed fellow.

"Telemachus," said she, addressing her son, "I fear you are no longer so
discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were younger you
had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown up,
though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a well to
do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by no means
what it should be. What is all this disturbance that has been going on,
and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully ill-treated?
What would have happened if he had suffered serious injury while a
suppliant in our house? Surely this would have been very discreditable
to you."

"I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure," replied
Telemachus, "I understand all about it and know when things are not
as they should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot,
however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and then
another of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind,
and I have no one to stand by me. After all, however, this fight between
Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it to do,
for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father Jove, Minerva, and
Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers of yours, some
inside the house and some out; and I wish they might all be as limp as
Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. See how he nods
his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing that he cannot
stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever that may be, for he
has no strength left in him."

Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, "Queen
Penelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could
see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your house
by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the whole
world both as regards personal beauty and strength of understanding."

To this Penelope replied, "Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my beauty
whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear
husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs, I
should both be more respected and show a better presence to the world.
As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which
heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. My husband foresaw it all, and when
he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand--'Wife,' he said,
'we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for the Trojans fight
well both with bow and spear. They are excellent also at fighting from
chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight sooner than this. I
know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back to you, or whether
I may not fall over there at Troy. In the meantime do you look after
things here. Take care of my father and mother as at present, and even
more so during my absence, but when you see our son growing a beard,
then marry whom you will, and leave this your present home.' This is
what he said and now it is all coming true. A night will come when I
shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest, for Jove has
taken from me all hope of happiness. This further grief, moreover, cuts
me to the very heart. You suitors are not wooing me after the custom of
my country. When men are courting a woman who they think will be a good
wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when they are each trying
to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen and sheep to feast the
friends of the lady, and they make her magnificent presents, instead of
eating up other people's property without paying for it."

This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying
to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words
which he knew she did not mean.

Then Antinous said, "Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as many
presents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is not
well to refuse a present; but we will not go about our business nor stir
from where we are, till you have married the best man among us whoever
he may be."

The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his
servant to bring his present. Antinous's man returned with a large and
lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifully
made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachus
immediately brought her a magnificent chain of gold and amber beads that
gleamed like sunlight. Eurydamas's two men returned with some
earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most
beautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a necklace
of the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautiful
present of some kind.

Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought the
presents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and dancing,
and stayed till evening came. They danced and sang till it grew dark;
they then brought in three braziers {151} to give light, and piled them
up with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit torches from
them, which the maids held up turn and turn about. Then Ulysses said:

"Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the queen
inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick wool.
I will hold the light for all these people. They may stay till morning,
but shall not beat me, for I can stand a great deal."

The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho began
to gibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, but had been
brought up by Penelope, who used to give her toys to play with, and
looked after her when she was a child; but in spite of all this she
showed no consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, and used to
misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with whom she was in love.

"Poor wretch," said she, "are you gone clean out of your mind? Go and
sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering
here. Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters--so
many of them too? Has the wine been getting into your head, or do you
always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you
beat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than he does not come
and cudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding out of the
house."

"Vixen," replied Ulysses, scowling at her, "I will go and tell
Telemachus what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb
from limb."

With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body
of the house. They trembled all over, for they thought he would do as he
said. But Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding up
torches and looking at the people--brooding the while on things that
should surely come to pass.

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their
insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against
them; she therefore set Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him,
which made the others laugh. "Listen to me," said he, "you suitors of
Queen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded. It is not for
nothing that this man has come to the house of Ulysses; I believe the
light has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head--for
his hair is all gone, every bit of it."

Then turning to Ulysses he said, "Stranger, will you work as a servant,
if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can you build
a stone fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the year round,
and will find you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then? Not you; for
you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you had rather fill
your belly by going round the country begging."

"Eurymachus," answered Ulysses, "if you and I were to work one against
the other in early summer when the days are at their longest--give me a
good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will last
the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing
grass is about. Or if you will plough against me, let us each take a
yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance:
turn me into a four acre field, and see whether you or I can drive the
straighter furrow. If, again, war were to break out this day, give me
a shield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting well upon my
temples--you would find me foremost in the fray, and would cease your
gibes about my belly. You are insolent and cruel, and think yourself
a great man because you live in a little world, and that a bad one. If
Ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, but you
will find them narrow when you try to fly through them."

Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, "You
wretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me, and
in public too. Has the wine been getting into your head or do you always
babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the
tramp Irus." With this he caught hold of a footstool, but Ulysses sought
protection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, for he was afraid.
The stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and knocked him down: the
man fell with a cry flat on his back, and his wine-jug fell ringing to
the ground. The suitors in the covered cloister were now in an uproar,
and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying, "I wish the stranger
had gone somewhere else, bad luck to him, for all the trouble he gives
us. We cannot permit such disturbance about a beggar; if such ill
counsels are to prevail we shall have no more pleasure at our banquet."

On this Telemachus came forward and said, "Sirs, are you mad? Can you
not carry your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit has
possessed you. I do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had
your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better."

The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
but Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, "Do not
let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer. Neither
let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses' servants. Let
the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we may make them
and go home to our rest. As for the stranger, let us leave Telemachus to
deal with him, for it is to his house that he has come."

Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of
Dulichium, servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water
and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made their
drink-offerings to the blessed gods: Then, when they had made their
drink-offerings and had drunk each one as he was minded, they took their
several ways each of them to his own abode.


Book XIX

TELEMACHUS AND ULYSSES REMOVE THE ARMOUR--ULYSSES INTERVIEWS
PENELOPE--EURYCLEA WASHES HIS FEET AND RECOGNISES THE SCAR ON HIS
LEG--PENELOPE TELLS HER DREAM TO ULYSSES.

Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with
Minerva's help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently he said
to Telemachus, "Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take
it down inside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have
removed it. Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the
smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went
away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more
particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over
their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace
both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people
to use them."

Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse
Euryclea and said, "Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while I take
the armour that my father left behind him down into the store room. No
one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all smirched
with soot during my own boyhood. I want to take it down where the smoke
cannot reach it."

"I wish, child," answered Euryclea, "that you would take the management
of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the
property yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to the
store-room? The maids would have done so, but you would not let them."

"The stranger," said Telemachus, "shall show me a light; when people eat
my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from."

Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.
Then Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields,
and spears inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in her
hand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said,
"Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters,
crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with
a flaming fire. Surely there is some god here who has come down from
heaven."

"Hush," answered Ulysses, "hold your peace and ask no questions, for
this is the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leave me here
to talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief will
ask me all sorts of questions."

On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner
court, to the room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bed
till morning, while Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the
means whereby with Minerva's help he might be able to kill the suitors.

Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, and
they set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the
fire in her accustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and had a
footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was covered with
a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the women's
room to join her. They set about removing the tables at which the wicked
suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was left, with
the cups from which they had drunk. They emptied the embers out of the
braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both light and heat;
but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time and said, "Stranger,
do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all night and spying
upon the women? Be off, you wretch, outside, and eat your supper there,
or you shall be driven out with a firebrand."

Ulysses scowled at her and answered, "My good woman, why should you be
so angry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are all
in rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about after the manner
of tramps and beggars generally? I too was a rich man once, and had a
fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now
am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number of
servants, and all the other things which people have who live well and
are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from me;
therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride and place
in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a care lest you get
out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should come home, for
there is still a chance that he may do so. Moreover, though he be dead
as you think he is, yet by Apollo's will he has left a son behind him,
Telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids in the house,
for he is now no longer in his boyhood."

Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, "Impudent
baggage," said she, "I see how abominably you are behaving, and you
shall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself, that
I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for whose
sake I am in such continual sorrow."

Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, "Bring a seat with a
fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story,
and listens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions."

Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soon
as Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, "Stranger, I shall
first ask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town and parents."

"Madam," answered Ulysses, "who on the face of the whole earth can dare
to chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself; you
are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the monarch
over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and barley,
the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs, and the sea
abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people do good deeds
under him. Nevertheless, as I sit here in your house, ask me some other
question and do not seek to know my race and family, or you will recall
memories that will yet more increase my sorrow. I am full of heaviness,
but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing in another person's house,
nor is it well to be thus grieving continually. I shall have one of the
servants or even yourself complaining of me, and saying that my eyes
swim with tears because I am heavy with wine."

Then Penelope answered, "Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty,
whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and my
dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs
I should be both more respected and should show a better presence to
the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. The chiefs from all our
islands--Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself,
are wooing me against my will and are wasting my estate. I can therefore
show no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say
that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time broken-hearted
about Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, and I have to invent
stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heaven put it in
my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to begin
working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I said to them,
'Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry
again immediately; wait--for I would not have my skill in needlework
perish unrecorded--till I have finished making a pall for the hero
Laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him. He
is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out
without a pall.' This was what I said, and they assented; whereon I
used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I would
unpick the stitches again by torch light. I fooled them in this way for
three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and I was
now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been
accomplished, those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed me to the
suitors, who broke in upon me and caught me; they were very angry with
me, so I was forced to finish my work whether I would or no. And now
I do not see how I can find any further shift for getting out of this
marriage. My parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my son
chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for he is
now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly able to look
after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with an excellent
disposition. Still, notwithstanding all this, tell me who you are and
where you come from--for you must have had father and mother of some
sort; you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock."

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist in
asking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me:
people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as
I have, and suffered as much among as many peoples. Nevertheless, as
regards your question I will tell you all you ask. There is a fair and
fruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it is thickly peopled and
there are ninety cities in it: the people speak many different languages
which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave Eteocretans,
Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi. There is a great
town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years had a
conference with Jove himself. {152} Minos was father to Deucalion, whose
son I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneus
sailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my
brother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the two;
hence it was in Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed him hospitality, for
the winds took him there as he was on his way to Troy, carrying him out
of his course from cape Malea and leaving him in Amnisus off the cave of
Ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to enter and he could hardly
find shelter from the winds that were then raging. As soon as he got
there he went into the town and asked for Idomeneus, claiming to be his
old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had already set sail for Troy some
ten or twelve days earlier, so I took him to my own house and showed him
every kind of hospitality, for I had abundance of everything. Moreover,
I fed the men who were with him with barley meal from the public store,
and got subscriptions of wine and oxen for them to sacrifice to their
heart's content. They stayed with me twelve days, for there was a gale
blowing from the North so strong that one could hardly keep one's feet
on land. I suppose some unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on
the thirteenth day the wind dropped, and they got away."

Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept
as she listened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon the
mountain tops when the winds from South East and West have breathed upon
it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even so did
her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time
sitting by her side. Ulysses felt for her and was sorry for her, but he
kept his eyes as hard as horn or iron without letting them so much
as quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears. Then, when she had
relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: "Now,
stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no you really
did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. Tell me, then,
how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and so also
with his companions."

"Madam," answered Ulysses, "it is such a long time ago that I can hardly
say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, and went
elsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect. Ulysses
wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened by a
gold brooch with two catches for the pin. On the face of this there was
a device that shewed a dog holding a spotted fawn between his fore paws,
and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground. Every one marvelled
at the way in which these things had been done in gold, the dog
looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was struggling
convulsively to escape. {153} As for the shirt that he wore next his
skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an onion, and
glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women who beheld
it. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that I do not
know whether Ulysses wore these clothes when he left home, or whether
one of his companions had given them to him while he was on his voyage;
or possibly some one at whose house he was staying made him a present
of them, for he was a man of many friends and had few equals among the
Achaeans. I myself gave him a sword of bronze and a beautiful purple
mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went down to his feet, and I
sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. He had a servant
with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you what he was
like; his shoulders were hunched, {154} he was dark, and he had thick
curly hair. His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him with greater
familiarity than he did any of the others, as being the most like-minded
with himself."

Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable
proofs that Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found relief
in tears she said to him, "Stranger, I was already disposed to pity you,
but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in my house. It
was I who gave Ulysses the clothes you speak of. I took them out of
the store room and folded them up myself, and I gave him also the gold
brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! I shall never welcome him home
again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for that detested city
whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention."

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure
yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can
hardly blame you for doing so. A woman who has loved her husband and
borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even
though he were a worse man than Ulysses, who they say was like a god.
Still, cease your tears and listen to what I can tell you. I will hide
nothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that I have lately
heard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home; he is among the
Thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that he has
begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew
were lost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and
the sun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the
sun-god's cattle, and they were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses
stuck to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the
Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him
as though he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing to
escort him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses would have been here
long ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gathering
wealth; for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is no
one can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all
this, and he swore to me--making drink-offerings in his house as he did
so--that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would
take Ulysses to his own country. He sent me off first, for there
happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing
island of Dulichium, but he showed me all the treasure Ulysses had got
together, and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keep
his family for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone to
Dodona that he might learn Jove's mind from the high oak tree, and know
whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly or in
secret. So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is close
at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer; nevertheless I
will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who is the first and
mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of Ulysses to
which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surely come to pass.
Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon
and the beginning of the next he will be here."

"May it be even so," answered Penelope; "if your words come true you
shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you
shall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysses
will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely
as that Ulysses ever was, there are now no longer any such masters in
the house as he was, to receive honourable strangers or to further them
on their way home. And now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make
him a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may be warm and
quiet till morning. Then, at day break wash him and anoint him again,
that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with Telemachus. It
shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil to
him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house. For how,
sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am superior to others of
my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if I let you dine in
my cloisters squalid and ill clad? Men live but for a little season; if
they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill so long as they are
alive, and speak contemptuously of them when they are dead, but he that
is righteous and deals righteously, the people tell of his praise among
all lands, and many shall call him blessed."

Ulysses answered, "Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from the
day that I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard. I will
lie as I have lain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night after night
have I passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited for morning. Nor,
again, do I like having my feet washed; I shall not let any of the young
hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if you have any old and
respectable woman who has gone through as much trouble as I have, I will
allow her to wash them."

To this Penelope said, "My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet
came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such
admirable propriety as you do. There happens to be in the house a most
respectable old woman--the same who received my poor dear husband in
her arms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy. She is
very feeble now, but she shall wash your feet." "Come here," said she,
"Euryclea, and wash your master's age-mate; I suppose Ulysses' hands and
feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of us
dreadfully fast."

On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began
to weep and made lamentation saying, "My dear child, I cannot think
whatever I am to do with you. I am certain no one was ever more
god-fearing than yourself, and yet Jove hates you. No one in the whole
world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs
when you prayed you might come to a green old age yourself and see your
son grow up to take after you: yet see how he has prevented you alone
from ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubt the women in
some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him as all
these sluts here have been gibing at you. I do not wonder at your
not choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have
insulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope
has said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for Penelope's
sake and for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of
compassion in my mind; and let me say this moreover, which pray attend
to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here before now,
but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came who was so like Ulysses
in figure, voice, and feet as you are."

"Those who have seen us both," answered Ulysses, "have always said we
were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too."

Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his
feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath
was warm enough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned away
from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold
of his leg she would recognise a certain scar which it bore, whereon the
whole truth would come out. And indeed as soon as she began washing her
master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by
a wild boar when he was hunting on Mt. Parnassus with his excellent
grandfather Autolycus--who was the most accomplished thief and perjurer
in the whole world--and with the sons of Autolycus. Mercury himself had
endowed him with this gift, for he used to burn the thigh bones of goats
and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his companionship. It happened
once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had found the child of his
daughter just born. As soon as he had done supper Euryclea set the
infant upon his knees and said, "Autolycus, you must find a name for
your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one."

"Son-in-law and daughter," replied Autolycus, "call the child thus: I
am highly displeased with a large number of people in one place and
another, both men and women; so name the child 'Ulysses,' or the child
of anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother's family on Mt.
Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present and will
send him on his way rejoicing."

Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from
Autolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome.
His grandmother Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head,
and both his beautiful eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to get
dinner ready, and they did as he told them. They brought in a five year
old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints; these
they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them; they
roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round. Thus through
the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and every
man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun set
and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sleep.

When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons of
Autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too.
They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezy
upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields,
fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Oceanus, they came to a
mountain dell. The dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the
beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of Autolycus,
among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he had a long
spear in his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thick
brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it, nor
could the sun's rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick
with fallen leaves. The boar heard the noise of the men's feet, and the
hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he rushed
from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay with
fire flashing from his eyes. Ulysses was the first to raise his spear
and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick for him,
and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with a gash that
tore deep though it did not reach the bone. As for the boar, Ulysses hit
him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear went right through
him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until the life went out of
him. The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcass of the
boar, and bound Ulysses' wound; then, after saying a spell to stop the
bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. But when Autolycus and
his sons had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they made him some splendid
presents, and sent him back to Ithaca with much mutual good will. When
he got back, his father and mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked
him all about it, and how he had hurt himself to get the scar; so he
told them how the boar had ripped him when he was out hunting with
Autolycus and his sons on Mt. Parnassus.

As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well
hold of it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. The leg fell
into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all the water
was spilt on the ground; Euryclea's eyes between her joy and her grief
filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught Ulysses
by the beard and said, "My dear child, I am sure you must be Ulysses
himself, only I did not know you till I had actually touched and handled
you."

As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell her
that her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to
look in that direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva had
diverted her attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat with
his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said,
"Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed me at your own
breast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at last come to
my own home again? Since it has been borne in upon you by heaven to
recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about it to any
one else in the house, for if you do I tell you--and it shall surely
be--that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I will
not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the other
women."

"My child," answered Euryclea, "what are you talking about? You know
very well that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold my
tongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and lay
my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into your
hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who have been
ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless."

And Ulysses answered, "Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I am
well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your
tongue and leave everything to heaven."

As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water, for
the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and anointed
him with oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm himself,
and hid the scar under his rags. Then Penelope began talking to him and
said:

"Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter.
It is indeed nearly bed time--for those, at least, who can sleep in
spite of sorrow. As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such
unmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties and
looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during the
whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie
awake thinking, and my heart becomes a prey to the most incessant and
cruel tortures. As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in
the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many
a plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own
child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in
its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguard
my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard
to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is
not now time for me to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing
me and making me such magnificent presents. As long as my son was still
young, and unable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving my
husband's house, but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me to
do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up his
property. Listen, then, to a dream that I have had and interpret it for
me if you can. I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out
of a trough, {155} and of which I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a
great eagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak
into the neck of each of them till he had killed them all. Presently
he soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;
whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so
piteously was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he
came back again, and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with
human voice, and told me to leave off crying. 'Be of good courage,' he
said, 'daughter of Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omen
that shall surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am no
longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who
will bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.' On this I woke, and when
I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as usual."

"This dream, Madam," replied Ulysses, "can admit but of one
interpretation, for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be
fulfilled? The death of the suitors is portended, and not one single one
of them will escape."

And Penelope answered, "Stranger, dreams are very curious and
unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come true.
There are two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies proceed;
the one is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that come through
the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean
something to those that see them. I do not think, however, that my own
dream came through the gate of horn, though I and my son should be most
thankful if it proves to have done so. Furthermore I say--and lay my
saying to your heart--the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened day
that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about to hold a
tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in the court,
one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a ship is built;
he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the whole
twelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and whichever
of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow through all
the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this house of my lawful
husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even so, I doubt not
that I shall remember it in my dreams."

Then Ulysses answered, "Madam, wife of Ulysses, you need not defer your
tournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow,
handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron."

To this Penelope said, "As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk
to me, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot do
permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on earth
a time for all things. I will therefore go upstairs and recline upon
that couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears from the day
Ulysses set out for the city with a hateful name."

She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her
maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva shed
sweet sleep over her eyelids.


Book XX

ULYSSES CANNOT SLEEP--PENELOPE'S PRAYER TO DIANA--THE TWO SIGNS FROM
HEAVEN--EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS ARRIVE--THE SUITORS DINE--CTESIPPUS
THROWS AN OX'S FOOT AT ULYSSES--THEOCLYMENUS FORETELLS DISASTER AND
LEAVES THE HOUSE.

Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock's hide, on the
top of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten,
and Eurynome {156} threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself
down. There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which
he should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the
habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling and
laughing with one another. This made Ulysses very angry, and he doubted
whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and there, or
to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors. His heart
growled within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and shows her
teeth when she sees a stranger, so did his heart growl with anger at
the evil deeds that were being done: but he beat his breast and said,
"Heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the day when the
terrible Cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in silence
till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made sure of
being killed."

Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he
tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front
of a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, that he
may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn himself about
from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he was,
he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wicked suitors.
But by and by Minerva came down from heaven in the likeness of a woman,
and hovered over his head saying, "My poor unhappy man, why do you lie
awake in this way? This is your house: your wife is safe inside it, and
so is your son who is just such a young man as any father may be proud
of."

"Goddess," answered Ulysses, "all that you have said is true, but I am
in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitors
single handed, seeing what a number of them there always are. And there
is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable. Supposing
that with Jove's and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must
ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their avengers when it
is all over."

"For shame," replied Minerva, "why, any one else would trust a worse
ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less wise
than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout
in all your troubles? I tell you plainly that even though there were
fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you should take
all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you. But go to
sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you shall be
out of your troubles before long."

As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to
Olympus.

While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that
eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting
up in her bed began to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping she
prayed to Diana saying, "Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove, drive an
arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch me up and
bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the mouths
of over-flowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus. The
daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods killed
them, so they were left orphans. But Venus took care of them, and fed
them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught them to excel all
women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them an imposing
presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of accomplishment;
but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see Jove about getting
them married (for well does he know both what shall happen and what
not happen to every one) the storm winds came and spirited them away to
become handmaids to the dread Erinyes. Even so I wish that the gods who
live in heaven would hide me from mortal sight, or that fair Diana might
strike me, for I would fain go even beneath the sad earth if I might
do so still looking towards Ulysses only, and without having to yield
myself to a worse man than he was. Besides, no matter how much people
may grieve by day, they can put up with it so long as they can sleep at
night, for when the eyes are closed in slumber people forget good and
ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me even in my dreams. This very
night methought there was one lying by my side who was like Ulysses as
he was when he went away with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed
that it was no dream, but the very truth itself."

On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and
it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by
his side. Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he had
lain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock's
hide out into the open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed,
saying "Father Jove, since you have seen fit to bring me over land and
sea to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me, give
me a sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who are now
waking within the house, and let me have another sign of some kind from
outside."

Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high
up among the clouds from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad
when he heard it. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from
hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another sign.
There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind wheat and
barley which are the staff of life. The others had ground their task and
had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet finished, for
she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard the thunder she
stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master. "Father Jove," said
she, "you, who rule over heaven and earth, you have thundered from a
clear sky without so much as a cloud in it, and this means something for
somebody; grant the prayer, then, of me your poor servant who calls
upon you, and let this be the very last day that the suitors dine in the
house of Ulysses. They have worn me out with labour of grinding meal for
them, and I hope they may never have another dinner anywhere at all."

Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman's
speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should avenge
himself on the suitors.

Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;
Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about
his shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a
doughty spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the
threshold of the cloister and said to Euryclea, "Nurse, did you make the
stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let him
shift for himself?--for my mother, good woman though she is, has a
way of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting
others who are in reality much better men."

"Do not find fault child," said Euryclea, "when there is no one to find
fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he liked:
your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and he said he
would not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make one
for him, but he said he was such a wretched outcast that he would not
sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having an undressed
bullock's hide and some sheepskins put for him in the cloister and I
threw a cloak over him myself." {157}

Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans
were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was not
alone, for his two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the maids and
said, "Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and sprinkling
them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the seats; wipe down
the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean out the mixing-jugs
and the cups, and go for water from the fountain at once; the suitors
will be here directly; they will be here early, for it is a feast day."

Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them
went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to
work about the house. The men who were in attendance on the suitors also
came up and began chopping firewood. By and by the women returned from
the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three best pigs
he could pick out. These he let feed about the premises, and then he
said good-humouredly to Ulysses, "Stranger, are the suitors treating you
any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?"

"May heaven," answered Ulysses, "requite to them the wickedness with
which they deal high-handedly in another man's house without any sense
of shame."

Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for
he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors' dinner; and he
had two shepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse,
and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses. "Are you still here,
stranger," said he, "to pester people by begging about the house? Why
can you not go elsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding
before we have given each other a taste of our fists. You beg without
any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the Achaeans,
as well as here?"

Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third
man, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and
some goats. These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to take
people over when any one comes to them. So Philoetius made his heifer
and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to the
swineherd. "Who, Swineherd," said he, "is this stranger that is lately
come here? Is he one of your men? What is his family? Where does he come
from? Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man, but the
gods give sorrow to whom they will--even to kings if it so pleases
them."

As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;
"Good day to you, father stranger," said he, "you seem to be very poorly
off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. Father Jove,
of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children, yet
you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweat came
over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he
reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags as
this man's are, if indeed he is still among the living. If he is already
dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas! for my good master, who made
me his stockman when I was quite young among the Cephall