must have taken him, or a god must have prompted him
to do so. As soon as he had put the stone back to its place against the
door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and
then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with all
this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off
them. So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my
hands:

"'Look here, Cyclops,' said I, you have been eating a great deal of
man's flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what
kind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as a
drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me and
further me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and
raving most intolerably. You ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can
you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this
way?'

"He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste of
the wine that he begged me for another bowl full. 'Be so kind,' he said,
'as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once. I want to make
you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine even in this
country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but this
drinks like Nectar and Ambrosia all in one.'

"I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him, and
three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I saw
that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as
I could: 'Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me,
therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this is what
my father and mother and my friends have always called me.'

"But the cruel wretch said, 'Then I will eat all Noman's comrades before
Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is the present
that I will make him.'

"As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon
him. Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets of
human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk. Then I
thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and encouraged
my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted. When the wood, green
though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of the fire glowing
with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had filled their
hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end of the beam into the
monster's eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept turning it
round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship's plank with an
auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep on turning as long
as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beam into his eye,
till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked it round and
round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded his eyelids
and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the fire. As a
blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to temper it--for
it is this that gives strength to the iron--and it makes a great hiss as
he does so, even thus did the Cyclops' eye hiss round the beam of olive
wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again. We ran away in a
fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gore from his eye,
and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did
so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleak headlands near him;
so they gathered from all quarters round his cave when they heard him
crying, and asked what was the matter with him.

"'What ails you, Polyphemus,' said they, 'that you make such a noise,
breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able
to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man is
trying to kill you either by fraud or by force?'

"But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, 'Noman is killing
me by fraud; no man is killing me by force.'

"'Then,' said they, 'if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; when
Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better pray
to your father Neptune.'

"Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my clever
stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain, felt about
with his hands till he found the stone and took it from the door; then
he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it to catch
anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might be foolish
enough to attempt this.

"As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my own
life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who knows
that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. In the
end I deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep were well
grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them noiselessly in
threes together, with some of the withies on which the wicked monster
used to sleep. There was to be a man under the middle sheep, and the two
on either side were to cover him, so that there were three sheep to each
man. As for myself there was a ram finer than any of the others, so I
caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in the thick wool under
his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece, face upwards, keeping a
firm hold on it all the time.

"Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but
when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep
hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens
waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their
master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they
stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were
underneath their bellies. As the ram was going out, last of all, heavy
with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, Polyphemus laid
hold of it and said:

"'My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this
morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the
mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are the
first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is it
because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because
that wicked Noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink and
blinded him? But I will have his life yet. If you could understand and
talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dash his
brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave. I should thus
have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Noman has done me.'

"As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way
out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram's belly,
and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by
constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them
down to the ship. The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who
had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops had killed.
However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to
hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once
and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote
the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far out as my
voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.

"'Cyclops,' said I, 'you should have taken better measure of your man
before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eat up your
visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin would
find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.'

"He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from
off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that
it was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder. {81} The sea
quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised
carried us back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore.
But I snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my
men by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they
laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far as we were before, I
was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of
me to hold my tongue.

"'Do not,' they exclaimed, 'be mad enough to provoke this savage
creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us
back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death
of us; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have
pounded our heads and our ship's timbers into a jelly with the rugged
rocks he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.'

"But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,
'Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and
spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of
Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.'

"On this he groaned, and cried out, 'Alas, alas, then the old prophecy
about me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a man
both brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an
excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he
grew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day, and said
I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses. I have been all along
expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength, whereas
he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who has managed to
blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; come here, then,
Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my hospitality, and urge
Neptune to help you forward on your journey--for Neptune and I are
father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me, which no one else
neither god nor man can do.'

"Then I said, 'I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and
sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more
than Neptune to cure that eye of yours.'

"On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,
saying, 'Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begotten
son, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must
get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight
after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man's ship
and find trouble in his house.'] {82}

"Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up
a rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with
prodigious force. It fell just short of the ship, but was within a
little of hitting the end of the rudder. The sea quaked as the rock fell
into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on our way
towards the shore of the island.

"When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our
ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our
return. We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the
sea shore; we also landed the Cyclops' sheep, and divided them equitably
amongst us so that none might have reason to complain. As for the ram,
my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra share; so I
sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones to Jove, who
is the lord of all. But he heeded not my sacrifice, and only thought how
he might destroy both my ships and my comrades.

"Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted
our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on
dark, we camped upon the beach. When the child of morning rosy-fingered
Dawn appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then they
took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed
on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we
had lost our comrades.


Book X

AEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONES, CIRCE.

"Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son of
Hippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as
it were) upon the sea, {83} iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now,
Aeolus has six daughters and six lusty sons, so he made the sons marry
the daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother,
feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury. All day long the
atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats till
it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their well
made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. These were
the people among whom we had now come.

"Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the
time about Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans. I
told him exactly how everything had happened, and when I said I must go,
and asked him to further me on my way, he made no sort of difficulty,
but set about doing so at once. Moreover, he flayed me a prime ox-hide
to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which he shut up in the hide as
in a sack--for Jove had made him captain over the winds, and he could
stir or still each one of them according to his own pleasure. He put
the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly with a silver thread
that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow from any quarter. The
West wind which was fair for us did he alone let blow as it chose; but
it all came to nothing, for we were lost through our own folly.

"Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native
land showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see the
stubble fires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light
sleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we might
get home the faster. On this the men fell to talking among themselves,
and said I was bringing back gold and silver in the sack that Aeolus
had given me. 'Bless my heart,' would one turn to his neighbour, saying,
'how this man gets honoured and makes friends to whatever city or
country he may go. See what fine prizes he is taking home from Troy,
while we, who have travelled just as far as he has, come back with hands
as empty as we set out with--and now Aeolus has given him ever so much
more. Quick--let us see what it all is, and how much gold and silver
there is in the sack he gave him.'

"Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack,
whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried us
weeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke, and knew
not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and make the best
of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the ship, while
the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our fleet back to the
Aeolian island.

"When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by
the ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my men
and went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feasting
with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the threshold.
They were astounded when they saw us and said, 'Ulysses, what brings you
here? What god has been ill-treating you? We took great pains to further
you on your way home to Ithaca, or wherever it was that you wanted to go
to.'

"Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, 'My men have undone
me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me this
mischief, for you can if you will.'

"I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their
father answered, 'Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the
island; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for you
come here as one abhorred of heaven.' And with these words he sent me
sorrowing from his door.

"Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and
fruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Six
days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the
rocky stronghold of Lamus--Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians,
where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked]
salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last answers
the salute. In that country a man who could do without sleep might earn
double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle, and another as a shepherd,
for they work much the same by night as they do by day. {84}

"When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep cliffs,
with a narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains took all their
ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for there was
never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was always dead calm. I
kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at the very end of the
point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoitre, but could see no sign
neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising from the ground. So I
sent two of my company with an attendant to find out what sort of people
the inhabitants were.

"The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the
people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till
presently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch water,
and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates. She was going
to the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their water, and
when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of
that country might be, and over what kind of people he ruled; so she
directed them to her father's house, but when they got there they found
his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they were horrified
at the sight of her.

"She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly,
and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them,
and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other
two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates
raised a hue-and-cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians
sprang up from every quarter--ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks at
us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard
the horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and the
death cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians speared them like fishes
and took them home to eat them. While they were thus killing my men
within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, and
told my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare like
the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough
when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at us.
As for the others there was not one of them left.

"Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had
lost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives--a
great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes--for
they are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus.
We brought our ship into a safe harbour without a word, for some god
guided us thither, and having landed we lay there for two days and two
nights, worn out in body and mind. When the morning of the third day
came I took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to
reconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human handiwork,
or hear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of a high look-out I
espied the smoke of Circe's house rising upwards amid a dense forest of
trees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen the smoke, I
would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end I deemed it
best to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some
of them instead of going myself.

"When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my
solitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my
path. He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the
river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck
him in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean
through him, and he lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of
him. Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and laid
it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted them into a
fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound the four feet of
the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round my neck and
walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag was much too
big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder, steadying him with
one hand. As I threw him down in front of the ship, I called the men
and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them. 'Look here my friends,'
said I, 'we are not going to die so much before our time after all, and
at any rate we will not starve so long as we have got something to eat
and drink on board.' On this they uncovered their heads upon the sea
shore and admired the stag, for he was indeed a splendid fellow. Then,
when they had feasted their eyes upon him sufficiently, they washed
their hands and began to cook him for dinner.

"Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed
there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it
came on dark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning,
rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, 'My friends,
we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have no
idea where the sun either sets or rises, {85} so that we do not even
know East from West. I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try
and find one. We are certainly on an island, for I went as high as
I could this morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to the
horizon; it lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising from out
of a thick forest of trees.'

"Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had
been treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogre
Polyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing to
be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies and set a captain
over each; I gave one company to Eurylochus, while I took command of
the other myself. Then we cast lots in a helmet, and the lot fell upon
Eurylochus; so he set out with his twenty-two men, and they wept, as
also did we who were left behind.

"When they reached Circe's house they found it built of cut stones, on
a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest.
There were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it--poor
bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged
into subjection. They did not attack my men, but wagged their great
tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against them.
{86} As hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming from
dinner--for they know he will bring them something--even so did these
wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the men
were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures. Presently
they reached the gates of the goddess's house, and as they stood there
they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as she worked at
her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such dazzling colours
as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites, whom I valued and
trusted more than any other of my men, said, 'There is some one inside
working at a loom and singing most beautifully; the whole place resounds
with it, let us call her and see whether she is woman or goddess.'

"They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them
enter. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, who
suspected mischief and staid outside. When she had got them into her
house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with
cheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked
poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she
turned them into pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her
pig-styes. They were like pigs--head, hair, and all, and they grunted
just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they
remembered everything.

"Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some acorns
and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back to tell me
about the sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome with dismay
that though he tried to speak he could find no words to do so; his eyes
filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh, till at last we forced
his story out of him, and he told us what had happened to the others.

"'We went,' said he, 'as you told us, through the forest, and in the
middle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a place
that could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else she was a
goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to
her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and
invited us in. The others did not suspect any mischief so they followed
her into the house, but I staid where I was, for I thought there might
be some treachery. From that moment I saw them no more, for not one of
them ever came out, though I sat a long time watching for them.'

"Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I also
took my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and shew me the
way. But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously,
saying, 'Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here, for
I know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return
alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with
the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.'

"'Stay where you are, then,' answered I, 'eating and drinking at the
ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.'

"With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through the
charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe,
I met Mercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in the
hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his
face. He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, 'My poor
unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, alone and
without knowing the way? Your men are shut up in Circe's pigstyes, like
so many wild boars in their lairs. You surely do not fancy that you can
set them free? I can tell you that you will never get back and will have
to stay there with the rest of them. But never mind, I will protect
you and get you out of your difficulty. Take this herb, which is one
of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to Circe's house, it
will be a talisman to you against every kind of mischief.

"'And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will try
to practice upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and she will
drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to charm
you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you will prevent her
spells from working. I will tell you all about it. When Circe strikes
you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as though you
were going to kill her. She will then be frightened, and will desire you
to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blank refuse her, for
you want her to set your companions free, and to take good care also of
yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by all the blessed gods
that she will plot no further mischief against you, or else when she has
got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for nothing.'

"As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed me what it
was like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk; the
gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods can do
whatever they like.

"Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island;
but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with
care as I walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there and called
the goddess, and as soon as she heard me she came down, opened the door,
and asked me to come in; so I followed her--much troubled in my mind.
She set me on a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver, there was a
footstool also under my feet, and she mixed a mess in a golden goblet
for me to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant me mischief. When she
had given it me, and I had drunk it without its charming me, she struck
me with her wand. 'There now,' she cried, 'be off to the pigstye, and
make your lair with the rest of them.'

"But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her,
whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke
piteously, saying, 'Who and whence are you? from what place and people
have you come? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you?
Never yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I
gave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than the
bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always said would come here some day with
his ship while on his way home from Troy; so be it then; sheathe your
sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to trust
each other.'

"And I answered, 'Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with you
when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now that you
have got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to
bed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shall
certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take
your solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.'

"So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed her
oath then I went to bed with her.

"Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their
work. They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the
holy waters that run down into the sea. One of them spread a fair purple
cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it. Another brought
tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of gold. A
third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl and put golden
cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and set it to
boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which she had lighted. When
the water in the cauldron was boiling, {87} she poured cold into it
till it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and began
washing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the
tire and stiffness out of my limbs. As soon as she had done washing me
and anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt
and led me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a
footstool also under my feet. A maid servant then brought me water in a
beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for me to wash
my hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper servant brought
me bread and offered me many things of what there was in the house, and
then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat without heeding what
was before me, still moody and suspicious.

"When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief, she
came to me and said, 'Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though you
were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and drink?
Is it that you are still suspicious? You ought not to be, for I have
already sworn solemnly that I will not hurt you.'

"And I said, 'Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can think of
either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his friends
free and let him see them. If you want me to eat and drink, you must
free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with my own eyes.'

"When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wand
in her hand and opened the pigstye doors. My men came out like so many
prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and
anointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad drug
had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than they
were before, and much taller and better looking. They knew me at once,
seized me each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the whole
house was filled with the sound of their halloa-ballooing, and Circe
herself was so sorry for them that she came up to me and said, 'Ulysses,
noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where you have left
your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide all your ship's
gear and property in some cave, and come back here with your men.'

"I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the men at
the ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw me the silly
blubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves break out and
gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be milked
after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds with
their lowing. They seemed as glad to see me as though they had got back
to their own rugged Ithaca, where they had been born and bred. 'Sir,'
said the affectionate creatures, 'we are as glad to see you back as
though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but tell us all about the fate of
our comrades.'

"I spoke comfortingly to them and said, 'We must draw our ship on to the
land, and hide the ship's gear with all our property in some cave; then
come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe's house, where
you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great
abundance.'

"On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried
to hold them back and said, 'Alas, poor wretches that we are, what will
become of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, who
will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to
keep guard over her house. Remember how the Cyclops treated us when our
comrades went inside his cave, and Ulysses with them. It was all through
his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.'

"When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen
blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of
his being a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him
and said, 'Sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the
ship, but take the rest of us with you to Circe's house.'

"On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind after
all, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand that
I had given him.

"Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind
were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them woollen
cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all comfortably at
dinner in her house. As soon as the men saw each other face to face
and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud till the whole
palace rang again. Thereon Circe came up to me and said, 'Ulysses, noble
son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; I know how much you
have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you have fared among cruel
savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so stay here, and eat and
drink till you are once more as strong and hearty as you were when you
left Ithaca; for at present you are weakened both in body and mind; you
keep all the time thinking of the hardships you have suffered during
your travels, so that you have no more cheerfulness left in you.'

"Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a whole
twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. But
when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had
come round, my men called me apart and said, 'Sir, it is time you began
to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your
house and native country at all.'

"Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong day to
the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but when
the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down to
sleep in the covered cloisters. I, however, after I had got into bed
with Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what
I had got to say. 'Circe,' said I, 'please to keep the promise you made
me about furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get back and so
do my men, they are always pestering me with their complaints as soon as
ever your back is turned.'

"And the goddess answered, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall
none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there
is another journey which you have got to take before you can sail
homewards. You must go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine to
consult the ghost of the blind Theban prophet Teiresias, whose reason is
still unshaken. To him alone has Proserpine left his understanding even
in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.'

"I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and would
gladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently
when I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, 'And who
shall guide me upon this voyage--for the house of Hades is a port that
no ship can reach.'

"'You will want no guide,' she answered; 'raise your mast, set your
white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there
of itself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you will
reach the fertile shore of Proserpine's country with its groves of tall
poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your
ship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of
Hades. You will find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon
and Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron, and
you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers run into
one another.

"'When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench
a cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a
drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then wine,
and in the third place water--sprinkling white barley meal over the
whole. Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble ghosts,
and promise them that when you get back to Ithaca you will sacrifice a
barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load the pyre with
good things. More particularly you must promise that Teiresias shall
have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all your flocks.

"'When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer
them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; but
yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the river.
On this, many dead men's ghosts will come to you, and you must tell your
men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and offer them as a
burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades and to Proserpine. Then draw your
sword and sit there, so as to prevent any other poor ghost from
coming near the spilt blood before Teiresias shall have answered your
questions. The seer will presently come to you, and will tell you about
your voyage--what stages you are to make, and how you are to sail the
sea so as to reach your home.'

"It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed
me in my shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful light
gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle
round her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle. Then I went
about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to
each of them man by man: 'You must not lie sleeping here any longer,'
said I to them, 'we must be going, for Circe has told me all about it.'
And on this they did as I bade them.

"Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We had
with us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or
courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the
rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. When he heard the
noise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgot
all about coming down by the main staircase, so he tumbled right off the
roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house of Hades.

"When I had got the men together I said to them, 'You think you are
about to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead of
this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to consult
the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.'

"The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves
on the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend
matters by crying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting
our fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard
by the ship. She passed through the midst of us without our knowing it,
for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does not
wish to be seen?


Book XI

THE VISIT TO THE DEAD. {88}

"Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into the
water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on
board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind. Circe,
that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew dead aft
and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well filled;
so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship's gear and let her go as the
wind and helmsman headed her. All day long her sails were full as she
held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down and darkness
was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the river
Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who live
enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce
neither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but
the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got there
we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the
waters of Oceanus till we came to the place of which Circe had told us.

"Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword
and dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all the
dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with water,
and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying earnestly to
the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when I got back to
Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best I had, and
would load the pyre with good things. I also particularly promised
that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the best in all my
flocks. When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut the throats of
the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon the ghosts
came trooping up from Erebus--brides, {89} young bachelors, old men worn
out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave men who had
been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched with blood; they
came from every quarter and flitted round the trench with a strange kind
of screaming sound that made me turn pale with fear. When I saw them
coming I told the men to be quick and flay the carcasses of the two dead
sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and at the same time to repeat
prayers to Hades and to Proserpine; but I sat where I was with my sword
drawn and would not let the poor feckless ghosts come near the blood
till Teiresias should have answered my questions.

"The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had
not yet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked and
unburied in Circe's house, for we had had too much else to do. I was
very sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: 'Elpenor,' said I, 'how
did you come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have got here
on foot quicker than I have with my ship.'

"'Sir,' he answered with a groan, 'it was all bad luck, and my own
unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe's house,
and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase but fell
right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to the house
of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have left behind
you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father who brought
you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the one hope of
your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that when you leave this
limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean island. Do not
go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or I may bring
heaven's anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I have, build
a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in days to come
what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave the oar I used
to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.' And I said, 'My
poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.'

"Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the one
side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost
of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the
ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her
alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her, but
even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the blood till
I had asked my questions of Teiresias.

"Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre
in his hand. He knew me and said, 'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why,
poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the dead
in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw your sword
that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.'

"So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of the
blood he began with his prophecy.

"'You want to know,' said he, 'about your return home, but heaven will
make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye
of Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
blinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you
can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging to
the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave these flocks
unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet after
much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of
the destruction both of your ship and of your men. Even though you may
yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all your
men, [in another man's ship, and you will find trouble in your house,
which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring your
substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to your
wife.

"'When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you must
take a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a country
where the people have never heard of the sea and do not even mix salt
with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and oars that
are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certain token which
cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you and will say it must
be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your shoulder; on this you
must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar
to Neptune. {90} Then go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in
heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death shall come to you
from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very gently when you are full
of years and peace of mind, and your people shall bless you. All that I
have said will come true].' {91}

"'This,' I answered, 'must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and
tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother's ghost close by us; she
is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own
son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can
make her know me.'

"'That,' said he, 'I can soon do. Any ghost that you let taste of the
blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let
them have any blood they will go away again.'

"On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for his
prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until my
mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and spoke
fondly to me, saying, 'My son, how did you come down to this abode of
darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard thing for the living to
see these places, for between us and them there are great and terrible
waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot, but he
must have a good ship to take him. Are you all this time trying to find
your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back to Ithaca nor
seen your wife in your own house?'

"'Mother,' said I, 'I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of
the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean
land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one
long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with
Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans. But
tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have a long
illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to eternity?
Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behind me, is my
property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold of it, who
thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me again what my wife
intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with my son and
guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she could and
married again?'

"My mother answered, 'Your wife still remains in your house, but she is
in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night
and day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and
Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain
largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a magistrate,
{92} and how every one invites him; your father remains at his old place
in the country and never goes near the town. He has no comfortable bed
nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in front of the fire
with the men and goes about all in rags, but in summer, when the warm
weather comes on again, he lies out in the vineyard on a bed of vine
leaves thrown any how upon the ground. He grieves continually about your
never having come home, and suffers more and more as he grows older. As
for my own end it was in this wise: heaven did not take me swiftly and
painlessly in my own house, nor was I attacked by any illness such as
those that generally wear people out and kill them, but my longing to
know what you were doing and the force of my affection for you--this it
was that was the death of me.' {93}

"Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother's ghost.
Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each
time she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and
being touched to the quick I said to her, 'Mother, why do you not stay
still when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around one
another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in
the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of
grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?'

"'My son,' she answered, 'most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when they
are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together; these
perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has left the
body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now, however,
go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all these
things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.'

"Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
wives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds
about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.
In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at
once. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned
her told me her race and lineage.

"The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of
Cretheus the son of Aeolus. {94} She fell in love with the river Enipeus
who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when she
was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her lover,
lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave arched
itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god, whereon he
loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber. When the god
had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in his own and
said, 'Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods are not
fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve months.
Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home, but hold your
tongue and do not tell any one.'

"Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and
Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was
a great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in
Pylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson, Pheres,
and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.

"Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of
having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two sons
Amphion and Zethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and built
a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not hold
Thebes till they had walled it.

"Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove
indomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon,
and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon.

"I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot it
was to marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her after
having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to the
world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief for the spite
the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house of the mighty
jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging spirits
haunted him as for an outraged mother--to his ruing bitterly thereafter.

"Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given
priceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of
Iasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She bore
Nestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously
lovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus
would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles from
the grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task. The only man
who would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent seer, {95} but
the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle caught
him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full year had passed and
the same season came round again, Iphicles set him at liberty, after
he had expounded all the oracles of heaven. Thus, then, was the will of
Jove accomplished.

"And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,
Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these heroes
are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a special
dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each one of them
every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of gods.

"After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace
of Neptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short
lived. They were the finest children that were ever born in this world,
and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they
were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest. They
threatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to set Mount
Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa,
that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if
they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed both of them,
before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks or chin.

"Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the
magician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but
he did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the
island of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her.

"I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own
husband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name every
single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and it is
time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or here. As
for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it."

Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless
throughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:--

"What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? Is he not tall and good
looking, and is he not clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of you
share in the distinction. Do not be in a hurry to send him away, nor
niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need, for
heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance."

Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among
them, "My friends," said he, "what our august queen has just said to us
is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it;
but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with King
Alcinous."

"The thing shall be done," exclaimed Alcinous, "as surely as I still
live and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious to
get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow,
by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I mean
to give him. As regards his escort it will be a matter for you all, and
mine above all others as the chief person among you."