enians, and now
his cattle are countless; no one could have done better with them than I
have, for they have bred like ears of corn; nevertheless I have to keep
bringing them in for others to eat, who take no heed to his son though
he is in the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven, but are already
eager to divide Ulysses' property among them because he has been away so
long. I have often thought--only it would not be right while his son
is living--of going off with the cattle to some foreign country; bad as
this would be, it is still harder to stay here and be ill-treated about
other people's herds. My position is intolerable, and I should long
since have run away and put myself under the protection of some other
chief, only that I believe my poor master will yet return, and send all
these suitors flying out of the house."

"Stockman," answered Ulysses, "you seem to be a very well-disposed
person, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore I will tell
you, and will confirm my words with an oath. By Jove, the chief of all
gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses
shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you
shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here."

"If Jove were to bring this to pass," replied the stockman, "you should
see how I would do my very utmost to help him."

And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to
murder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand--an
eagle with a dove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, "My friends,
this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to
dinner instead."

The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the
benches and seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the
heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.
They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every
man his cup, while Philoetius handed round the bread in the bread
baskets, and Melanthius poured them out their wine. Then they laid their
hands upon the good things that were before them.

Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that
was paved with stone; {158} he gave him a shabby looking seat at a
little table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought
to him, with his wine in a gold cup. "Sit there," said he, "and drink
your wine among the great people. I will put a stop to the gibes and
blows of the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to
Ulysses, and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your
hands and your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief."

The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech;
then Antinous said, "We do not like such language but we will put up
with it, for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. If Jove had
let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now."

Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile the
heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the
Achaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo.

Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man
his portion, and feasted to their heart's content; those who waited
at table gave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for
Telemachus had told them to do so.

But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their
insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against
them. Now there happened to be among them a ribald fellow, whose name
was Ctesippus, and who came from Same. This man, confident in his
great wealth, was paying court to the wife of Ulysses, and said to the
suitors, "Hear what I have to say. The stranger has already had as
large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor
reasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. I
will, however, make him a present on my own account, that he may have
something to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses'
servants."

As he spoke he picked up a heifer's foot from the meat-basket in which
it lay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little
aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion {159} as he did
so, and it hit the wall, not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely to
Ctesippus, "It is a good thing for you," said he, "that the stranger
turned his head so that you missed him. If you had hit him I should have
run you through with my spear, and your father would have had to see
about getting you buried rather than married in this house. So let me
have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am grown up
now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on,
instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. I have long seen
you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: I have put
up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no further
violence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far rather die
than see such disgraceful scenes day after day--guests insulted, and men
dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way."

They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said, "No
one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it, for
it is quite reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the stranger,
or any one else of the servants who are about the house; I would say,
however, a friendly word to Telemachus and his mother, which I trust may
commend itself to both. 'As long,' I would say, 'as you had ground for
hoping that Ulysses would one day come home, no one could complain of
your waiting and suffering {160} the suitors to be in your house. It
would have been better that he should have returned, but it is now
sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk all this
quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man,
and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you will
yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink
in peace, while your mother will look after some other man's house, not
yours.'"

To this Telemachus answered, "By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of my
unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is wandering
in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my mother's
marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she will, and
I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare not insist
point blank that she shall leave the house against her own wishes.
Heaven forbid that I should do this."

Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set
their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter.
Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears,
and their hearts were heavy with forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this
and said, "Unhappy men, what is it that ails you? There is a shroud
of darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with
tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams
drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are full
of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted out
of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land."

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus
then said, "This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark
here."

But Theoclymenus said, "Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.
I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an
understanding mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for
I see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are
insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be
able to escape."

He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him
welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking
Telemachus by laughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to
him, "Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this
importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skill
for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here is
another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet. Let me persuade
you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship and send them
off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring."

Telemachus gave him no heed, but sate silently watching his father,
expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.

Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seat
placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear
what every one was saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amid much
merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had sacrificed
many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing can be
conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a brave man
were soon to lay before them--for they had brought their doom upon
themselves.


Book XXI

THE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUS
AND PHILOETIUS

Minerva now put it in Penelope's mind to make the suitors try their
skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves,
as a means of bringing about their destruction. She went upstairs and
got the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle of
ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end of
the house, where her husband's treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought
iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full of
deadly arrows that had been given him by a friend whom he had met in
Lacedaemon--Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell in with one another
in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses was staying in
order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; for the
Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and had
sailed away with them and with their shepherds. In quest of these
Ulysses took a long journey while still quite young, for his father and
the other chieftains sent him on a mission to recover them. Iphitus had
gone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that he had lost,
and the mule foals that were running with them. These mares were the
death of him in the end, for when he went to the house of Jove's son,
mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, Hercules to his
shame killed him, though he was his guest, for he feared not heaven's
vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which he had set before
Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the mares
himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, and gave
him the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and which on
his death had been left by him to his son. Ulysses gave him in return
a sword and a spear, and this was the beginning of a fast friendship,
although they never visited at one another's houses, for Jove's son
Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do so. This bow, then, given him
by Iphitus, had not been taken with him by Ulysses when he sailed for
Troy; he had used it so long as he had been at home, but had left it
behind as having been a keepsake from a valued friend.

Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the
carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to get
it quite straight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung the
doors. She loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in the key,
and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held the doors;
{161} these flew open with a noise like a bull bellowing in a meadow,
and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chests stood in
which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along with fragrant herbs:
reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow case from the peg
on which it hung. She sat down with it on her knees, weeping bitterly as
she took the bow out of its case, and when her tears had relieved her,
she went to the cloister where the suitors were, carrying the bow and
the quiver, with the many deadly arrows that were inside it. Along
with her came her maidens, bearing a chest that contained much iron
and bronze which her husband had won as prizes. When she reached the
suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of
the cloister, holding a veil before her face, and with a maid on either
side of her. Then she said:

"Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of
this house because its owner has been long absent, and without other
pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize that
you are contending for, I will bring out the mighty bow of Ulysses, and
whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send his arrow through
each one of twelve axes, him will I follow and quit this house of my
lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth. But even so I
doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams."

As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron
before the suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had
bidden him. Hard by, the stockman wept also when he saw his master's
bow, but Antinous scolded them. "You country louts," said he, "silly
simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by crying
in this way? She has enough to grieve her in the loss of her husband;
sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or go outside if
you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you. We suitors shall have to
contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it no light matter
to string such a bow as this is. There is not a man of us all who is
such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and remember him, though I
was then only a child."

This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to
string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to
be the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses,
whom he was dishonouring in his own house--egging the others on to do so
also.

Then Telemachus spoke. "Great heavens!" he exclaimed, "Jove must have
robbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother saying she
will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying
myself as though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the
contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a woman whose
peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet in Ithaca
nor on the mainland. You know this as well as I do; what need have I to
speak in praise of my mother? Come on, then, make no excuses for delay,
but let us see whether you can string the bow or no. I too will make
trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through the iron, I shall
not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger, not if I can
win the prizes which my father won before me."

As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him,
and took his sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row, in
a long groove which he had dug for them, and had made straight by line.
{162} Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was
surprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though he had never
seen anything of the kind before. This done, he went on to the pavement
to make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his
might to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though he had
hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron. He was trying for
the fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses made a sign to
check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:

"Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am too
young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able
to hold my own if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are
stronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled."

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led
into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow. Then
he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous said:

"Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the place
at which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine."

The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise. He
was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the
mixing-bowl. {163} He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and
was indignant with the others. He was now the first to take the bow and
arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he could not
string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work, they
therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, "My friends, I
cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take the life and
soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die than to live
after having missed the prize that we have so long striven for, and
which has brought us so long together. Some one of us is even now hoping
and praying that he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen this bow
and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some other woman,
and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer and whose lot it
is to win her."

On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door, {164}
with the arrow standing against the tip of the bow. Then he took his
seat again on the seat from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him
saying:

"Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous and
intolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this bow
take the life of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot bend
it yourself? True, you were not born to be an archer, but there are
others who will soon string it."

Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, "Look sharp, light a fire in
the court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring us also
a large ball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let us warm the
bow and grease it--we will then make trial of it again, and bring the
contest to an end."

Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside
it. He also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the
house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but
they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it. Nevertheless
there still remained Antinous and Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders
among the suitors and much the foremost among them all.

Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and
Ulysses followed them. When they had got outside the gates and the outer
yard, Ulysses said to them quietly:

"Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am in
doubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What manner of
men would you be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him back
here all of a sudden? Say which you are disposed to do--to side with the
suitors, or with Ulysses?"

"Father Jove," answered the stockman, "would indeed that you might so
ordain it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should see
with what might and main I would fight for him."

In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return;
when, therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses
said, "It is I, Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but at last,
in the twentieth year, I am come back to my own country. I find that you
two alone of all my servants are glad that I should do so, for I
have not heard any of the others praying for my return. To you two,
therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be. If heaven shall
deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both of you,
will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me
as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I will now give
you convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured. See, here is
the scar from the boar's tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting on
Mt. Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus."

As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they
had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threw
their arms round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysses
kissed their hands and faces in return. The sun would have gone down
upon their mourning if Ulysses had not checked them and said:

"Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and
tell those who are within. When you go in, do so separately, not both
together; I will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this
moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try to
prevent me from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore,
Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and
tell the women to close the doors of their apartment. If they hear any
groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must not
come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work.
And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer court,
and to bind them securely at once."

When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat
that he had left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside.

At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming
it by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly
grieved. He heaved a deep sigh and said, "I grieve for myself and for us
all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not care
nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in Ithaca
and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our being so inferior to
Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow. This will disgrace us
in the eyes of those who are yet unborn."

"It shall not be so, Eurymachus," said Antinous, "and you know it
yourself. Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who can
string a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side--as for the axes
they can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the house
and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we
may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will
tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow--the best he has; we
can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again make
trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end."

The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over
the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine
and water and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering.
Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as
he desired, Ulysses craftily said:--

"Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I am
minded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who
has just spoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present and
leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give victory
to whom it will. For the moment, however, give me the bow that I may
prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether I still have
as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel and neglect have
made an end of it."

This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow,
Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, "Wretched creature, you
have not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought
to think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your
betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others
have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation. No other beggar
or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among ourselves; the
wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it does with all those who
drink immoderately. It was wine that inflamed the Centaur Eurytion when
he was staying with Peirithous among the Lapithae. When the wine had
got into his head, he went mad and did ill deeds about the house of
Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were there assembled, so they
rushed at him and cut off his ears and nostrils; then they dragged him
through the doorway out of the house, so he went away crazed, and bore
the burden of his crime, bereft of understanding. Henceforth, therefore,
there was war between mankind and the centaurs, but he brought it upon
himself through his own drunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that
it will go hardly with you if you string the bow: you will find no mercy
from any one here, for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus,
who kills every one that comes near him: you will never get away alive,
so drink and keep quiet without getting into a quarrel with men younger
than yourself."

Penelope then spoke to him. "Antinous," said she, "it is not right that
you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house.
If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of
Ulysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and make me
his wife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind:
none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all
reason."

"Queen Penelope," answered Eurymachus, "we do not suppose that this man
will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest
some of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should go
gossiping about and say, 'These suitors are a feeble folk; they are
paying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them was
able to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house strung it
at once and sent an arrow through the iron.' This is what will be said,
and it will be a scandal against us."

"Eurymachus," Penelope answered, "people who persist in eating up the
estate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect
others to think well of them. Why then should you mind if men talk as
you think they will? This stranger is strong and well-built, he says
moreover that he is of noble birth. Give him the bow, and let us see
whether he can string it or no. I say--and it shall surely be--that if
Apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will give him a cloak
and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs and robbers,
and a sharp sword. I will also give him sandals, and will see him sent
safely wherever he wants to go."

Then Telemachus said, "Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or in
the islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any
one have the bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one way or the
other, not even though I choose to make the stranger a present of the
bow outright, and let him take it away with him. Go, then, within the
house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff,
and the ordering of your servants. This bow is a man's matter, and mine
above all others, for it is I who am master here."

She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son's saying in her
heart. Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned
her dear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her eyelids.

The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, but
the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one of
them said, "You idiot, where are you taking the bow to? Are you out of
your wits? If Apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your own
boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worry you to
death."

Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bow
down then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the other
side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, "Father Eumaeus,
bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you with
stones back to the country, for I am the better man of the two. I wish
I was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house as I am
than you, I would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, for they
mean mischief."

Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put them
in a better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow on and
placed it in the hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he called
Euryclea apart and said to her, "Euryclea, Telemachus says you are to
close the doors of the women's apartments. If they hear any groaning or
uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out, but
are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work."

Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women's
apartments.

Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of
the outer court. There was a ship's cable of byblus fibre lying in the
gatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again,
resuming the seat that he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, who
had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about,
and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating into
its two horns during his absence. Then would one turn towards his
neighbour saying, "This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either he has
got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlike
style does the old vagabond handle it."

Another said, "I hope he may be no more successful in other things than
he is likely to be in stringing this bow."

But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung it
as easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes
the twisted gut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand
to prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the
twittering of a swallow. The suitors were dismayed, and turned colour
as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, Jove thundered loudly as a
sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as he heard the omen that the
son of scheming Saturn had sent him.

He took an arrow that was lying upon the table {165}--for those
which the Achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the
quiver--he laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of
the arrow and the string toward him, still seated on his seat. When
he had taken aim he let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the
handle-holes of the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right
through them, and into the outer courtyard. Then he said to Telemachus:

"Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what I
aimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong, and
not as the suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time for
the Achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and
then otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are the
crowning ornaments of a banquet."

As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded on
his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father's seat.


Book XXII

THE KILLING OF THE SUITORS--THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSELVES
ARE MADE TO CLEANSE THE CLOISTERS AND ARE THEN HANGED.

Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement
with his bow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on to the
ground at his feet and said, "The mighty contest is at an end. I will
now see whether Apollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another mark which
no man has yet hit."

On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up a
two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands.
He had no thought of death--who amongst all the revellers would think
that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill
him? The arrow struck Antinous in the throat, and the point went clean
through his neck, so that he fell over and the cup dropped from his
hand, while a thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils. He kicked
the table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread and
roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground. {166}
The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that a man had been hit;
they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked
everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear,
and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily. "Stranger," said they, "you shall
pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see no other contest;
you are a doomed man; he whom you have slain was the foremost youth in
Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed him."

Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by
mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of
every one of them. But Ulysses glared at them and said:

"Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You have
wasted my substance, {167} have forced my women servants to lie with
you, and have wooed my wife while I was still living. You have feared
neither God nor man, and now you shall die."

They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round about
to see whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone spoke.

"If you are Ulysses," said he, "then what you have said is just. We have
done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous who was
the head and front of the offending lies low already. It was all his
doing. It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so much
care about that; what he wanted was something quite different, and Jove
has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kill your son and to be chief
man in Ithaca. Now, therefore, that he has met the death which was his
due, spare the lives of your people. We will make everything good among
ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten and drunk.
Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth twenty oxen, and we will keep
on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened. Until we have
done this no one can complain of your being enraged against us."

Ulysses again glared at him and said, "Though you should give me all
that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have,
I will not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full. You must
fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not a man of you shall."

Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying:

"My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where he
is and shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let us then
show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you
from his arrows. Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from the
pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise
such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting."

As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides,
and with a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shot
an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself
in his liver. He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table.
The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as he smote the
earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and he kicked the stool
with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.

Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try and
get him away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, and
struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and
went right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and
struck the earth with his forehead. Then Telemachus sprang away from
him, leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that if he
stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans might come up and hack
at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off at a run, and
immediately was at his father's side. Then he said:

"Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet for
your temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour for
the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed."

"Run and fetch them," answered Ulysses, "while my arrows hold out, or
when I am alone they may get me away from the door."

Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where
the armour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and four brass
helmets with horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all speed to his
father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the swineherd
also put on their armour, and took their places near Ulysses. Meanwhile
Ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the suitors one
by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows gave out, he
set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by the door post,
and hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders; on his comely
head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that
nodded menacingly above it, {168} and he grasped two redoubtable
bronze-shod spears.

Now there was a trap door {169} on the wall, while at one end of the
pavement {170} there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this
exit was closed by a well-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to stand by
this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a time.
But Agelaus shouted out, "Cannot some one go up to the trap door and
tell the people what is going on? Help would come at once, and we should
soon make an end of this man and his shooting."

"This may not be, Agelaus," answered Melanthius, "the mouth of the
narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. One
brave man could prevent any number from getting in. But I know what I
will do, I will bring you arms from the store-room, for I am sure it is
there that Ulysses and his son have put them."

On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store-room
of Ulysses' house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmets
and spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give them to
the suitors. Ulysses' heart began to fail him when he saw the suitors
{171} putting on their armour and brandishing their spears. He saw the
greatness of the danger, and said to Telemachus, "Some one of the women
inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may be Melanthius."

Telemachus answered, "The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I left
the store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than
I have. Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the
women who is doing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius the
son of Dolius."

Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the
store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to
Ulysses who was beside him, "Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is that
scoundrel Melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store
room. Say, shall I kill him, if I can get the better of him, or shall
I bring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the many
wrongs that he has done in your house?"

Ulysses answered, "Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check, no
matter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius' hands and
feet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make the door fast
behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him close up
to the rafters from a high bearing-post, {172} that he may linger on in
an agony."

Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the
store room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he was
busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the
two took their stand on either side of the door and waited. By and by
Melanthius came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted
shield in the other, which had been borne by Laertes when he was young,
but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had become
unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, and
threw him struggling to the ground. They bent his hands and feet well
behind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysses had
told them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung him up
from a high pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him did
you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaeus saying, "Melanthius, you will pass
the night on a soft bed as you deserve. You will know very well when
morning comes from the streams of Oceanus, and it is time for you to be
driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on."

There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on
their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take
their places by the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the
cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the
body of the court were still both brave and many. Then Jove's daughter
Minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of Mentor.
Ulysses was glad when he saw her and said, "Mentor, lend me your help,
and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns he has done
you. Besides, you are my age-mate."

But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from the
other side raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the first to
reproach her. "Mentor," he cried, "do not let Ulysses beguile you into
siding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what we will do: when
we have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too. You
shall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we will
take all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with
Ulysses' property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor
your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of
Ithaca."

This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very
angrily. {173} "Ulysses," said she, "your strength and prowess are no
longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the
Trojans about the noble lady Helen. You killed many a man in those days,
and it was through your stratagem that Priam's city was taken. How comes
it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are on your own
ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house? Come on, my
good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son of Alcimus shall
fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred upon him."

But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still
further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew
up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in
the form of a swallow.

Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,
Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon
the suitors' side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives
they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen
under the arrows of Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said, "My
friends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away after
having done nothing for him but brag. They are standing at the doors
unsupported. Do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your
spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory by
killing him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about the others."

They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all of
no effect. One hit the door post; another went against the door; the
pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had
avoided all the spears of the suitors Ulysses said to his own men, "My
friends, I should say we too had better let drive into the middle of
them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing us
outright."

They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.
Ulysses killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, while
the stockman killed Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as the others
drew back into a corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained
their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.

The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their
weapons for the most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of
the cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft of
another struck the wall. Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the
top skin from off Telemachus's wrist, and Ctesippus managed to graze
Eumaeus's shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell
to the ground. Then Ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd of
suitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and Eumaeus
Polybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, and
taunted him saying, "Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be so
foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your
speech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a present of
this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when he was
begging about in his own house."

Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with a
spear in close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor in
the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that he fell forward
full on his face upon the ground. Then Minerva from her seat on the
rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed.
They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle maddened
by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest. As
eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down on
the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill
them, for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the
sport--even so did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite
them on every side. They made a horrible groaning as their brains were
being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.

Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, "Ulysses I beseech
you have mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the women in
your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others. I
saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for their
folly. I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die
without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no thanks
for all the good that I did."

Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, "If you were their
sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be
long before I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have
children by her. Therefore you shall die."

With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when
he was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then he struck
Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling in the
dust while he was yet speaking.

The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes--he who had been forced by the
suitors to sing to them--now tried to save his life. He was standing
near towards the trap door, {174} and held his lyre in his hand. He did
not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar of
Jove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes and Ulysses
had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go straight
up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he deemed it best
to embrace Ulysses' knees. So he laid his lyre on the ground between the
mixing bowl {175} and the silver-studded seat; then going up to Ulysses
he caught hold of his knees and said, "Ulysses, I beseech you have mercy
on me and spare me. You will be sorry for it afterwards if you kill a
bard who can sing both for gods and men as I can. I make all my lays
myself, and heaven visits me with every kind of inspiration. I would
sing to you as though you were a god, do not therefore be in such a
hurry to cut my head off. Your own son Telemachus will tell you that I
did not want to frequent your house and sing to the suitors after their
meals, but they were too many and too strong for me, so they made me."

Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. "Hold!" he
cried, "the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will spare Medon
too, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or
Eumaeus has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when you
were raging about the court."

Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under a
seat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly
flayed heifer's hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus,
and laid hold of his knees.

"Here I am, my dear sir," said he, "stay your hand therefore, and tell
your father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors for
having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to
yourself."

Ulysses smiled at him and answered, "Fear not; Telemachus has saved your
life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how greatly
better good deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore, outside
the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of the
slaughter--you and the bard--while I finish my work here inside."

The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down
by Jove's great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting that
they would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole court carefully
over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was still living,
but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering in their blood.
They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of the sea, and
thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the heat of the sun
makes an end of them. Even so were the suitors lying all huddled up one
against the other.

Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, "Call nurse Euryclea; I have something
to say to her."

Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women's room. "Make
haste," said he, "you old woman who have been set over all the other
women in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you."

When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women's room
and came out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the
corpses bespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just been
devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so
that he is a fearful sight; even so was Ulysses besmirched from head
to foot with gore. When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity of
blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a great
deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, "Old woman," said he,
"rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about
it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men. Heaven's doom and
their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they
respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came
near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for their
wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women in the
house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent." {176}

"I will tell you the truth, my son," answered Euryclea. "There are fifty
women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding wool,
and all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all {177} have
misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to
Penelope. They showed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has only
lately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the
female servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your wife all that has
happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep."

"Do not wake her yet," answered Ulysses, "but tell the women who have
misconducted themselves to come to me."

Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to
Ulysses; in the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the
swineherd. "Begin," said he, "to remove the dead, and make the women
help you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables and
seats. When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take the
women into the space between the domed room and the wall of the outer
court, and run them through with your swords till they are quite dead,
and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they used to lie
in secret with the suitors."

On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly.
First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one
another in the gatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made them do
their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out. When they had
done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and water,
while Telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood and dirt from
the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it out of doors.
Then when they had made the whole place quite clean and orderly, they
took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space between the wall
of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they could not get away:
and Telemachus said to the other two, "I shall not let these women die
a clean death, for they were insolent to me and my mother, and used to
sleep with the suitors."

So saying he made a ship's cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that
supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the
building, at a good height, lest any of the women's feet should touch
the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been
set for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and a
terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their heads
in nooses one after the other and die most miserably. {178} Their feet
moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long.

As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner
court. There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his
vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut
off his hands and his feet.

When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back
into the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear old
nurse Euryclea, "Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and
fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters. Go,
moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants, and also
all the maidservants that are in the house."

"All that you have said is true," answered Euryclea, "but let me bring
you some clean clothes--a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these rags on
your back any longer. It is not right."

"First light me a fire," replied Ulysses.

She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses
thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened;
whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, and
pressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders and
taking hold of his hands. It made him feel as if he should like to weep,
for he remembered every one of them. {179}


Book XXIII

PENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND--EARLY IN THE MORNING
ULYSSES, TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.

Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear
husband had come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feet
were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her
head to speak to her. "Wake up Penelope, my dear child," she exclaimed,
"and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this
long time past. Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has
killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating
up his estate and ill treating his son."

"My good nurse," answered Penelope, "you must be mad. The gods sometimes
send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish
people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to you;
for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you thus mock
me when I have trouble enough already--talking such nonsense, and waking
me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my eyes and
closed them? I have never slept so soundly from the day my poor husband
went to that city with the ill-omened name. Go back again into the
women's room; if it had been any one else who had woke me up to bring me
such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severe scolding. As
it is your age shall protect you."

"My dear child," answered Euryclea, "I am not mocking you. It is quite
true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was the stranger
whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachus knew
all the time that he was come back, but kept his father's secret that he
might have his revenge on all these wicked people."

Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea,
and wept for joy. "But my dear nurse," said she, "explain this to me;
if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome the
wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always
were?"

"I was not there," answered Euryclea, "and do not know; I only heard
them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching and huddled
up in a corner of the women's room with the doors closed, till your
son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulysses
standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round him,
one on top of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could have
seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and filth, and
looking just like a lion. But the corpses are now all piled up in the
gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a great fire
to purify the house with sulphur. He has sent me to call you, so come
with me that you may both be happy together after all; for now at last
the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband is come home
to find both wife and son aliv