

And Ulysses answered, "King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay here
for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded with your
noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound greatly to
my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my own people, and
should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me when I get
back to Ithaca."

"Ulysses," replied Alcinous, "not one of us who sees you has any idea
that you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many people
going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see
through them, but there is a style about your language which assures me
of your good disposition. Moreover you have told the story of your own
misfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practiced
bard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty
heroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perished
there. The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed
time--go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay here
listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell us
of your adventures."

"Alcinous," answered Ulysses, "there is a time for making speeches, and
a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will not
refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades
who did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their
return, through the treachery of a wicked woman.

"When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions,
the ghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by
those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon as he
had tasted the blood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out his
arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor substance any
more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him. 'How did you come
by your death,' said I, 'King Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise his winds and
waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end
of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing,
or while they were fighting in defence of their wives and city?'

"'Ulysses,' he answered, 'noble son of Laertes, I was not lost at sea
in any storm of Neptune's raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon the
mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me between
them. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered me most
miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while all
around me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding
breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. You
must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general engagement, or
in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the
way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the
loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood. I
heard Priam's daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed her close
beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body, and
raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but she slipped away
from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I was dying,
for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as a woman
when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. Fancy murdering her own
husband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home by my children and my
servants, but her abominable crime has brought disgrace on herself and
all women who shall come after--even on the good ones.'

"And I said, 'In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first to
last in the matter of their women's counsels. See how many of us fell
for Helen's sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischief
against you too during your absence.'

"'Be sure, therefore,' continued Agamemnon, 'and not be too friendly
even with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you know perfectly
well yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel about the
rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for Penelope
is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. We left her a
young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for Troy. This
child no doubt is now grown up happily to man's estate, {96} and he and
his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one another as it is
right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not even allow me
the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I could do so.
Furthermore I say--and lay my saying to your heart--do not tell people
when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal a march upon them,
for after all this there is no trusting women. But now tell me, and
tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes? Is he in
Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus--for I presume
that he is still living.'

"And I said, 'Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whether your
son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not
know.'

"As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the ghost
of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax who was
the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus.
The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously, saying,
'Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will you undertake
next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among us silly dead,
who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?'

"And I said, 'Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the
Achaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me
about my return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get
near the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been
in trouble all the time. As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet so
fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by all
us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you are
a great prince among the dead. Do not, therefore, take it so much to
heart even if you are dead.'

"'Say not a word,' he answered, 'in death's favour; I would rather be
a paid servant in a poor man's house and be above ground than king of
kings among the dead. But give me news about my son; is he gone to the
wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tell me also if
you have heard anything about my father Peleus--does he still rule among
the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas and
Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could I but stand by
his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when I
killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy--could I but be
as I then was and go even for a short time to my father's house, any one
who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.'

"'I have heard nothing,' I answered, 'of Peleus, but I can tell you all
about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyros
with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was always
first to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were the
only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the
plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men, but would
dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour. Many a man did
he kill in battle--I cannot name every single one of those whom he slew
while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say how
he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was the
handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of the
Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman's bribes. Moreover, when
all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had
made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open the
door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and
chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every
limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek;
he was all the time urging me to break out from the horse--grasping
the handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury
against the foe. Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got his
handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the fortune
of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spear nor in
close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.'

"When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across a
meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the
prowess of his son.

"The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own
melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof--still
angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour
of Achilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners
and Minerva were the judges. Would that I had never gained the day in
such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of all
the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess.

"When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, 'Ajax, will you not
forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that
hateful armour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough to
lose such a tower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you as much
as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid
on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, for it
was this that made him counsel your destruction--come hither, therefore,
bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what I can tell you.'

"He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts;
nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being
so angry, or I should have gone on talking to him, {97} only that there
were still others among the dead whom I desired to see.

"Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand
sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting
and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his
sentences upon them.

"After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the
ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he
had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.

"And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering some
nine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were digging
their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them off with
his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove's mistress Leto as
she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.

"I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that
reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never
reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it
dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground--parched
by the spite of heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that shed their
fruit over his head--pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and juicy
olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to take
some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.

"And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone
with both his hands. With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to the
top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over on to the
other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless stone
{98} would come thundering down again on to the plain. Then he would
begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and the
steam rose after him.

"After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he is
feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife, who
is daughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round him like
scared birds flying all whithers. He looked black as night with his bare
bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around as though
ever on the point of taking aim. About his breast there was a wondrous
golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears, wild
boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle, and
death. The man who made that belt, do what he might, would never be able
to make another like it. Hercules knew me at once when he saw me, and
spoke piteously, saying, 'My poor Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, are
you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I was above
ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity of suffering,
for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me--a low fellow
who set me all manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetch the
hell-hound--for he did not think he could find anything harder for me
than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him, for
Mercury and Minerva helped me.'

"On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed
where I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom
I would fain have seen--Theseus and Pirithous--glorious children of the
gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered such
appalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should send
up from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon. On
this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at
once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places,
whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus. We had to
row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.


Book XII

THE SIRENS, SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.

"After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the open
sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there is dawn
and sun-rise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to the sands
and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and waited
till day should break.

"Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sent
some men to Circe's house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut firewood
from a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we had
wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. When his
body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a stone
over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he had been
used to row with.

"While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back from
the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she could;
and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and wine.
Then she stood in the midst of us and said, 'You have done a bold thing
in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you will have died twice,
to other people's once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the
day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow
morning. In the meantime I will tell Ulysses about your course, and
will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering from
misadventure either by land or sea.'

"We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day
to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on
dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the
ship. Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated away from
the others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all about our
adventures.

"'So far so good,' said she, when I had ended my story, 'and now pay
attention to what I am about to tell you--heaven itself, indeed, will
recall it to your recollection. First you will come to the Sirens who
enchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in too close
and hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will never
welcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him to
death with the sweetness of their song. There is a great heap of dead
men's bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them.
Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men's ears with wax that
none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you
may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on a cross piece half
way up the mast, {99} and they must lash the rope's ends to the mast
itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening. If you beg and pray
the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.

"'When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give you
coherent directions {100} as to which of two courses you are to take; I
will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them for
yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against which
the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the blessed
gods call these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird may pass, no,
not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Jove, but the
sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father Jove has to send
another to make up their number; no ship that ever yet came to these
rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire are
freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men. The only vessel
that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo on her way from
the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against these great
rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love she bore to
Jason.

"'Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a
dark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not
even in summer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands and
twenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer
up, as smooth as though it had been polished. In the middle of it there
is a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus; you must
take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the
stoutest archer could send an arrow into it. Inside it Scylla sits and
yelps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young hound, but
in truth she is a dreadful monster and no one--not even a god--could
face her without being terror-struck. She has twelve mis-shapen feet,
and six necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck
she has a frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very
close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in a moment,
and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and
peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or
any larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which
Amphitrite teems. No ship ever yet got past her without losing some men,
for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man in each
mouth.

"'You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close together
that there is not more than a bow-shot between them. [A large fig
tree in full leaf {101} grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking
whirlpool of Charybdis. Three times in the day does she vomit forth her
waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not
there when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could not
save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you
can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.'

"'Is there no way,' said I, 'of escaping Charybdis, and at the same time
keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?'

"'You dare devil,' replied the goddess, 'you are always wanting to fight
somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even by the
immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage, extreme,
rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best chance
will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle about
her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you with
a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of your
men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out lustily to
Crataiis who is Scylla's dam, bad luck to her; she will then stop her
from making a second raid upon you.'

"'You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see
many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god--seven
herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each
flock. They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they
are tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of
the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera. Their mother when she had borne them and
had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, which was
a long way off, to live there and look after their father's flocks and
herds. If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but
getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you
harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship
and of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will
return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.'

"Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,
whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men to
loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took
their places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars. Presently
the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fair wind
that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sails well
filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship's gear, and let her
go as wind and helmsman headed her.

"Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, 'My friends, it
is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies that
Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that whether
we live or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she said we were
to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully in a
field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long as no
one else did. Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece half
way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that I
cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope's ends to the mast itself.
If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly still.'

"I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we
reached the island of the two Sirens, {102} for the wind had been very
favourable. Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a
breath of wind nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails
and stowed them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with
the foam they raised in rowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax
and cut it up small with my sword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong
hands till it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and
the rays of the sun-god son of Hyperion. Then I stopped the ears of all
my men, and they bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood upright
on the cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. When we had got
within earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate, the
Sirens saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.

"'Come here,' they sang, 'renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean name,
and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past us without staying
to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song--and he who listens will
go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the ills that
the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy, and can tell you
everything that is going to happen over the whole world.'

"They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear them
further I made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me free;
but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes bound me
with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of the Sirens'
voices. Then my men took the wax from their ears and unbound me.

"Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave from
which spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men were
so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea
resounded with the rushing of the waters, {103} but the ship stayed
where it was, for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore,
and exhorted them man by man not to lose heart.

"'My friends,' said I, 'this is not the first time that we have been
in danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclops
shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel
saved us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. Now,
therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with might
and main. As for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them,
for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steaming
rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be over
yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.'

"So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monster
Scylla, for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I did, but would
huddle together in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe's
strict instructions--I put on my armour. Then seizing two strong spears
I took my stand on the ship's bows, for it was there that I expected
first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much harm;
but I could not make her out anywhere, though I strained my eyes with
looking the gloomy rock all over and over.

"Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand
was Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the salt
water. As she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when it
is boiling over upon a great fire, and the spray reached the top of the
rocks on either side. When she began to suck again, we could see the
water all inside whirling round and round, and it made a deafening sound
as it broke against the rocks. We could see the bottom of the whirlpool
all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their wits ends for
fear. While we were taken up with this, and were expecting each moment
to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and snatched up my
six best men. I was looking at once after both ship and men, and in a
moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me, struggling in
the air as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them call out my
name in one last despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated, spear in hand,
upon some jutting rock {104} throws bait into the water to deceive the
poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox's horn with which his
spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as he catches them
one by one--even so did Scylla land these panting creatures on her
rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they screamed and
stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony. This was the most
sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.

"When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terrible
Charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the
goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still at
sea in my ship I could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the
yards, and the sheep bleating. Then I remembered what the blind Theban
prophet Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe had warned
me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god. So being much troubled I
said to the men, 'My men, I know you are hard pressed, but listen while
I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and how carefully Aeaean
Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god, for it
was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie. Head the ship,
therefore, away from the island.'

"The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me an
insolent answer. 'Ulysses,' said he, 'you are cruel; you are very strong
yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron, and now,
though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you will not
let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon this island, but
bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly on through the watches
of the flying night. It is by night that the winds blow hardest and do
so much damage; how can we escape should one of those sudden squalls
spring up from South West or West, which so often wreck a vessel when
our lords the gods are unpropitious? Now, therefore, let us obey the
behests of night and prepare our supper here hard by the ship; to-morrow
morning we will go on board again and put out to sea.'

"Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw that
heaven meant us a mischief and said, 'You force me to yield, for you are
many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his solemn
oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep,
he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of either, but will be
satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.'

"They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oath
we made the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of fresh
water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers. As soon as they
had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their poor
comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them weeping
and they went on crying till they fell off into a sound sleep.

"In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their
places, Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so that
land and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out
of the heavens. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared,
we brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave wherein the
sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I called the men together
in council.

"'My friends,' said I, 'we have meat and drink in the ship, let us mind,
therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it; for
these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives ear
to everything.' And again they promised that they would obey.

"For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there was
no other wind, but only South and East. {105} As long as corn and wine
held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when,
however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced
to go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking
whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving. One day,
therefore, I went up inland that I might pray heaven to show me some
means of getting away. When I had gone far enough to be clear of all
my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from the wind,
I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till by and by
they sent me off into a sweet sleep.

"Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, 'Listen
to me,' said he, 'my poor comrades. All deaths are bad enough but there
is none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in the best of these
cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? If we ever get
back to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it
with every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined to sink our
ship out of revenge for these homed cattle, and the other gods are of
the same mind, I for one would rather drink salt water once for all and
have done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such a desert
island as this is.'

"Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle,
so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men,
therefore, drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them
saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of barley-meal,
for there was no barley left. When they had done praying they killed the
cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the thigh bones, wrapped
them round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on top
of them. They had no wine with which to make drink-offerings over the
sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept pouring on a little water
from time to time while the inward meats were being grilled; then, when
the thigh bones were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they
cut the rest up small and put the pieces upon the spits.

"By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the ship
and to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat, so
I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. 'Father Jove,' I exclaimed,
'and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you have done me
a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me; see what fine
work these men of mine have been making in my absence.'

"Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had
been killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said
to the immortals, 'Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in
everlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses' ship:
they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing I
loved to look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again. If they
do not square accounts with me about my cows, I will go down to Hades
and shine there among the dead.'

"'Sun,' said Jove, 'go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over the
fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieces with a bolt
of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.'

"I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the
mouth of Mercury.

"As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each
one of the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for the
cows were dead already. And indeed the gods began at once to show signs
and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and
the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether
cooked or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do.

"For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon
them, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the fury
of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts, spread
sail, and put out to sea. As soon as we were well away from the island,
and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Saturn raised a black
cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it. We did not get on
much further, for in another moment we were caught by a terrific squall
from the West that snapped the forestays of the mast so that it fell
aft, while all the ship's gear tumbled about at the bottom of the
vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the ship's
stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell
overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left in him.

"Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and
round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck
it. The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water
round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently
deprived them of all chance of getting home again.

"I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel (which
drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the direction
of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong still hanging
about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together, and getting
astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to take me.

"[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got into
the South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to the
terrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actually happened,
for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise had reached
the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool. She was then sucking down the
salt sea water, {106} but I was carried aloft toward the fig tree, which
I caught hold of and clung on to like a bat. I could not plant my feet
anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a long way off and
the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too high, too vast, and
too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung patiently on, waiting till
the pool should discharge my mast and raft again--and a very long while
it seemed. A jury-man is not more glad to get home to supper, after
having been long detained in court by troublesome cases, than I was to
see my raft beginning to work its way out of the whirlpool again. At
last I let go with my hands and feet, and fell heavily into the sea,
hard by my raft on to which I then got, and began to row with my hands.
As for Scylla, the father of gods and men would not let her get further
sight of me--otherwise I should have certainly been lost.] {107}

"Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the
gods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and
powerful goddess Calypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I need
say no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all about it
yesterday, and I hate saying the same thing over and over again."


Book XIII

ULYSSES LEAVES SCHERIA AND RETURNS TO ITHACA.

Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered
cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous
began to speak.

"Ulysses," said he, "now that you have reached my house I doubt not you
will get home without further misadventure no matter how much you have
suffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here night after
night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insist
as follows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought gold,
{108} and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance;
let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a large
tripod and a cauldron. We will recoup ourselves by the levy of a general
rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the burden of
such a handsome present."

Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his
own abode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they
hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them. Alcinous
went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the ship's
benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers. Then they
went to the house of Alcinous to get dinner, and he sacrificed a bull
for them in honour of Jove who is the lord of all. They set the steaks
to grill and made an excellent dinner, after which the inspired bard,
Demodocus, who was a favourite with every one, sang to them; but Ulysses
kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as though to hasten his
setting, for he was longing to be on his way. As one who has been all
day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxen keeps thinking about
his supper and is glad when night comes that he may go and get it, for
it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so did Ulysses rejoice when
the sun went down, and he at once said to the Phaeacians, addressing
himself more particularly to King Alcinous:

"Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send me on
my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart's desire by giving me
an escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that I may turn
to good account; may I find my admirable wife living in peace among
friends, {109} and may you whom I leave behind me give satisfaction
to your wives and children; {110} may heaven vouchsafe you every good
grace, and may no evil thing come among your people."

Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying and
agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken
reasonably. Alcinous therefore said to his servant, "Pontonous, mix
some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to
father Jove, and speed our guest upon his way."

Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others
each from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that
live in heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands
of queen Arete.

"Farewell, queen," said he, "henceforward and for ever, till age and
death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now take
my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and
with king Alcinous."

As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to conduct
him to his ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent some maidservants
with him--one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to carry his strong
box, and a third with corn and wine. When they got to the water side
the crew took these things and put them on board, with all the meat and
drink; but for Ulysses they spread a rug and a linen sheet on deck that
he might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship. Then he too went on
board and lay down without a word, but the crew took every man his place
and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone to which it had been bound.
Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea, Ulysses fell into a deep,
sweet, and almost deathlike slumber. {111}

The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies over
the course when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curvetted as it were
the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water seethed in
her wake. She held steadily on her course, and even a falcon, swiftest
of all birds, could not have kept pace with her. Thus, then, she cut her
way through the water, carrying one who was as cunning as the gods, but
who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of all that he had suffered
both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea.

When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show,
the ship drew near to land. {112} Now there is in Ithaca a haven of the
old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line
of the sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms of
wind and sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship may
lie without being even moored. At the head of this harbour there is a
large olive tree, and at no great distance a fine overarching cavern
sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads. {113} There are mixing bowls
within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover,
there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of
sea purple--very curious to see--and at all times there is water within
it. It has two entrances, one facing North by which mortals can go
down into the cave, while the other comes from the South and is more
mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way taken by
the gods.

Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the place.
{114} She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length on
to the shore; {115} when, however, they had landed, the first thing they
did was to lift Ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the ship,
and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep. Then they took out the
presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to give him when he
was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these all together by
the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear some passer by
{116} might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and then they made
the best of their way home again.

But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already
threatened Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove. "Father Jove," said
he, "I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods, if
mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show such
small regard for me. I said I would let Ulysses get home when he had
suffered sufficiently. I did not say that he should never get home at
all, for I knew you had already nodded your head about it, and promised
that he should do so; but now they have brought him in a ship fast
asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading him with more
magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would ever
have brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of the spoil and
got home without misadventure."

And Jove answered, "What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talking
about? The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would
be monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. As
regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and
treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal
with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please."

"I should have done so at once," replied Neptune, "if I were not anxious
to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, I should
like to wreck the Phaeacian ship as it is returning from its escort.
This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I should also
like to bury their city under a huge mountain."

"My good friend," answered Jove, "I should recommend you at the very
moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way,
to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship. This
will astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the
mountain."

When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where the
Phaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid
way, had got close in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and
drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground.
After this he went away.

The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn
towards his neighbour, saying, "Bless my heart, who is it that can have
rooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port? We could
see the whole of her only a moment ago."

This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous
said, "I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said that
Neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over the
sea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning from
an escort, and bury our city under a high mountain. This was what my old
father used to say, and now it is all coming true. {117} Now therefore
let us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave off giving
people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice
twelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy upon us, and not
bury our city under the high mountain." When the people heard this they
were afraid and got ready the bulls.

Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians pray to king Neptune,
standing round his altar; and at the same time {118} Ulysses woke up
once more upon his own soil. He had been so long away that he did not
know it again; moreover, Jove's daughter Minerva had made it a foggy
day, so that people might not know of his having come, and that she
might tell him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens
and friends recognising him {119} until he had taken his revenge upon
the wicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to
him--the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the
goodly trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his
native land. So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and cried
aloud despairingly.

"Alas," he exclaimed, "among what manner of people am I fallen? Are they
savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? Where shall I put all
this treasure, and which way shall I go? I wish I had staid over there
with the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other great chief who
would have been good to me and given me an escort. As it is I do not
know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave it here for fear
somebody else should get hold of it. In good truth the chiefs and rulers
of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and have left me
in the wrong country; they said they would take me back to Ithaca and
they have not done so: may Jove the protector of suppliants chastise
them, for he watches over everybody and punishes those who do wrong.
Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew have gone off
with any of them."

He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his
clothes, but there was nothing missing; still he kept grieving about not
being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore of
the sounding sea bewailing his hard fate. Then Minerva came up to him
disguised as a young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with a good
cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on her comely
feet and held a javelin in her hand. Ulysses was glad when he saw her,
and went straight up to her.

"My friend," said he, "you are the first person whom I have met with in
this country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be well disposed
towards me. Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace your
knees and pray to you as though you were a god. Tell me, then, and tell
me truly, what land and country is this? Who are its inhabitants? Am I
on an island, or is this the sea board of some continent?"

Minerva answered, "Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have come
from somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this is. It is
a very celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and West. It is
rugged and not a good driving country, but it is by no means a bad
island for what there is of it. It grows any quantity of corn and also
wine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also
and goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering places
where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of Ithaca is known
even as far as Troy, which I understand to be a long way off from this
Achaean country."

Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his own
country, and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, and
made up a lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.

"I heard of Ithaca," said he, "when I was in Crete beyond the seas, and
now it seems I have reached it with all these treasures. I have left
as much more behind me for my children, but am flying because I killed
Orsilochus son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete. I killed him
because he wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from Troy with so
much trouble and danger both on the field of battle and by the waves of
the weary sea; he said I had not served his father loyally at Troy as
vassal, but had set myself up as an independent ruler, so I lay in wait
for him with one of my followers by the road side, and speared him as
he was coming into town from the country. It was a very dark night and
nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that I had killed him, but
as soon as I had done so I went to a ship and besought the owners, who
were Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me in Pylos or in Elis
where the Epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them. They
meant no guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and we sailed
on till we came hither by night. It was all we could do to get inside
the harbour, and none of us said a word about supper though we wanted it
badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we were. I was very
tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out of the ship,
and placed them beside me where I was lying upon the sand. Then they
sailed away to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distress of mind."

Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand.
Then she took the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, "He must be
indeed a shifty lying fellow," said she, "who could surpass you in all
manner of craft even though you had a god for your antagonist. Dare
devil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not
drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you are
in your own country again? We will say no more, however, about this, for
we can both of us deceive upon occasion--you are the most accomplished
counsellor and orator among all mankind, while I for diplomacy and
subtlety have no equal among the gods. Did you not know Jove's daughter
Minerva--me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch over you in
all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacians take so great a liking
to you? And now, again, I am come here to talk things over with you, and
help you to hide the treasure I made the Phaeacians give you; I want to
tell you about the troubles that await you in your own house; you have
got to face them, but tell no one, neither man nor woman, that you have
come home again. Bear everything, and put up with every man's insolence,
without a word."

And Ulysses answered, "A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but you
are so constantly changing your appearance that when he meets you it
is a hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not. This much,
however, I know exceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long as we
Achaeans were fighting before Troy, but from the day on which we went on
board ship after having sacked the city of Priam, and heaven dispersed
us--from that day, Minerva, I saw no more of you, and cannot ever
remember your coming to my ship to help me in a difficulty; I had to
wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered me from evil and I
reached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged me and took me
into the town. {120} And now, I beseech you in your father's name, tell
me the truth, for I do not believe I am really back in Ithaca. I am in
some other country and you are mocking me and deceiving me in all you
have been saying. Tell me then truly, have I really got back to my own
country?"

"You are always taking something of that sort in your head," replied
Minerva, "and that is why I cannot desert you in your afflictions; you
are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself on returning
from so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife and
children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or hearing
any news about them till you have exploited your wife, who remains at
home vainly grieving for you, and having no peace night or day for the
tears she sheds on your behalf. As for my not coming near you, I was
never uneasy about you, for I was certain you would get back safely
though you would lose all your men, and I did not wish to quarrel with
my uncle Neptune, who never forgave you for having blinded his son.
{121} I will now, however, point out to you the lie of the land, and
you will then perhaps believe me. This is the haven of the old merman
Phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head of it; [near
it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;] {122} here too is the overarching
cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable hecatomb to the
nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Neritum."

As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. Then
Ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed
the bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs,
saying, "Naiad nymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was never
again to see you, now therefore I greet you with all loving salutations,
and I will bring you offerings as in the old days, if Jove's redoubtable
daughter will grant me life, and bring my son to manhood."

"Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that," rejoined Minerva,
"let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where
they will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it all."

Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding
places, while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and
good clothing which the Phaeacians had given him. They stowed everything
carefully away, and Minerva set a stone against the door of the cave.
Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and consulted how
to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.

"Ulysses," said Minerva, "noble son of Laertes, think how you can lay
hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your
house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents
to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and
sending encouraging messages {123} to every one of them, but meaning the
very opposite of all she says."

And Ulysses answered, "In good truth, goddess, it seems I should have
come to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if you
had not given me such timely information. Advise me how I shall best
avenge myself. Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as on
the day when we loosed Troy's fair diadem from her brow. Help me now as
you did then, and I will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess, will
be with me."

"Trust me for that," said she, "I will not lose sight of you when once
we set about it, and I imagine that some of those who are devouring your
substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and brains.
I will begin by disguising you so that no human being shall know you; I
will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your yellow
hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall fill all who see it with
loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an unseemly
object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the son whom
you left behind you. Then go at once to the swineherd who is in charge
of your pigs; he has been always well affected towards you, and is
devoted to Penelope and your son; you will find him feeding his pigs
near the rock that is called Raven {124} by the fountain Arethusa, where
they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their manner.
Stay with him and find out how things are going, while I proceed to
Sparta and see your son, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon, where he
has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive." {125}

"But why," said Ulysses, "did you not tell him, for you knew all about
it? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship
while others are 